

EARLY DEVELOPMENT 
AND ITS DISTURBANCES

Developments in Psychoanalysis Series
Peter Fonagy, Mary Target and Liz Allison (Series Editors)
Published and distributed by Karnac Books
Other titles in the Series:
Developmental Science and Psychoanalysis: Integration and Innovation
 Edited by Linda Mayes, Peter Fonagy and Mary Target
Mentalizing in Child Therapy: Guidelines for Clinical Practitioners
  Edited by Annelies J.E. Verheugt-Pleiter, Jolien Zevalkink 
and Marcel G.J. Schmeets
Taboo or not Taboo? Forbidden Thoughts, Forbidden Acts in Psychoanalysis 
and Psychotherapy
 Edited by Brent Willock, Rebecca C. Curtis and Lori C. Bohm
Orders
Tel: +44 (0)20 7431 1075; Fax: +44 (0)20 7435 9076
E-mail: shop@karnacbooks.com
www.karnacbooks.com

EARLY DEVELOPMENT 
AND ITS DISTURBANCES
Clinical, Conceptual, and 
Empirical Research on ADHD 
and other Psychopathologies 
and its Epistemological 
Reflections  
Edited by
Marianne Leuzinger-Bohleber, 
Jorge Canestri and Mary Target

First published in 2010 by
Karnac Books Ltd
118 Finchley Road
London NW3 5HT
Copyright © 2010 by Marianne Leuzinger-Bohleber, Jorge Canestri 
and Mary Target
The right of Marianne Leuzinger-Bohleber, Jorge Canestri and Mary Target 
to be identified as the authors of this work has been asserted in accordance 
with §§ 77 and 78 of the Copyright Design and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in 
a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, 
mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior 
written permission of the publisher.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A C.I.P . for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN-13: 978-1-85575-745-5
Typeset by Vikatan Publishing Solutions (P) Ltd., Chennai, India
Printed in Great Britain
www.karnacbooks.com

vCONTENTS
PREFACE ix
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS xv
ABOUT THE EDITORS AND CONTRIBUTORS xvii
PART I: INTRODUCTION 1
CHAPTER ONE
Controversies on different approaches in psychoanalytic 
research on early development and ADHD 3
Marianne Leuzinger-Bohleber, Jorge Canestri and Mary Target
PART II: EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES 51
CHAPTER TWO
Attachment, trauma, and psychoanalysis: Where
psychoanalysis meets neuroscience 53
Peter Fonagy

vi  CONTENTS
DISCUSSION OF PETER FONAGY’S P APER
Developmental risks and their sequelae: Effects 
on attachment and mentalization 77
Gerd Lehmkuhl
DISCUSSION OF PETER FONAGY’S P APER 
Attachment, trauma, and psychoanalysis: Where
psychoanalysis meets neuroscience 87
Björn Salomonsson
CHAPTER THREE
Coping with children’s temperament 97
William B. Carey, M.D.
DISCUSSION OF WILLIAM B. CAREY’S P APER
Coping with children’s temperament: Early
development and its disturbances 113
Jorge Canestri
CHAPTER FOUR
Motion and meaning: Psychoanalytic inquiry
of so-called ADHD children 123
Heidi Staufenberg
DISCUSSION OF HEIDI STAUFENBERG’S P APER
ADHD from the empirical and clinical perspectives 143
Annette Streeck-Fischer
CHAPTER FIVE
Further comments on Sophia’s mimetic autism, 
with special reference to Bion’s theory of thinking 153
Jorge L. Ahumada and Luisa C. Busch de Ahumada
DISCUSSION OF JORGE L. AHUMADA 
AND LUISA C. BUSCH DE AHUMADA’S P APER 175
Angela Joyce

CONTENTS   vii
CHAPTER SIX
Early affect regulations and its disturbances: Approaching
ADHD in a psychoanalysis with a child and an adult 185
Marianne Leuzinger-Bohleber
PART III: PSYCHOANALYTIC RESEARCH: HOPES, 
VIEWS, CONTROVERSIAL DISCUSSION 207
CHAPTER SEVEN
Logic, meaning, and truth in psychoanalytic research 209
Charles Hanly
CHAPTER EIGHT
Trauma or drive—drive and trauma: Revisited 219
Ilse Grubrich-Simitis
CHAPTER NINE
Pluralism in theory and in research—and what now?
A plea for connectionism 239
Anna Ursula Dreher
CHAPTER TEN
New orleans congress panel: What does conceptual
research have to offer? 267
Jorge L. Ahumada and Roberto Doria-Medina
INDEX 281



ixWe are very pleased to present here one of the first psychoanalytic 
books devoted to Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) 
and other disturbances of early development. Some of the papers 
of this volume were presented at the ninth Joseph Sandler Research 
Conference which took place in Frankfurt for the first time. It was 
organized by both Research Subcommittees of the International 
Psychoanalytical Association (IPA): the Research Subcommittee for 
Empirical Research (Chair: Peter Fonagy) and the Research Sub-
committee for Clinical, Conceptual, Historical and Epistemological 
Research (Chair: Marianne Leuzinger-Bohleber).
The research conference carries the name of Joseph Sandler as he 
is known as one of the most productive psychoanalytic researchers of 
the last few decades. It is not so well-known that it was Joseph Sandler 
who created the so-called “Conceptual Resarch” in Psychoanalysis, 
and who organized a ‘concept group’ and developed the famous 
‘Hampstead Index’, which was taught in the unique psychoanalytic 
training courses at the Hampstead Clinic (now the Anna Freud Cen-
tre) in London. Since 1980 Joseph Sandler has also worked with a 
‘concept group’ at the Sigmund-Freud-Institut in Frankfurt, although PREFACE

x  PREFACE
he has also been Freud Memorial Professor at the University College 
London and since 1989 president of the International Psychoanalyti-
cal Association. We three editors share his conviction that the valid-
ity and usefulness of psychoanalytic concepts must show themselves 
in clinical practice. They are in constant change and thus have to be 
further developed and researched again and again. Joseph Sandler is 
indeed the father of conceptual research in psychoanalysis.
Institutionally it took more than 40 years until the former presi-
dent of the IPA, Daniel Widlöcher, appointed a second Subcom-
mittee for Clinical, Conceptual, Historical and Epistemological 
Research which should supplement the very successful Research 
Committee for Empirical Research by supporting conceptual, clini-
cal, epistemological and historical resarch in contemporary psycho-
analysis. The commitee members were Rachel Blass (Jerusalem and 
Essex), Jorge Canestri (Rom), Anna Ursula Dreher (Frankfurt), Paulo 
Duarte (Sao Paulo), Norbert Freedman (New York), Ilse Grubrich-
Simitis (Frankfurt), Mark Solms (Cape Town/London), Mary Target 
(London), Susana Vinocur de Fischbein (Buenos Aires), Sverre 
Varvin (Oslos), and Samuel Zysman (Buenos Aires). The three edi-
tors of this volume were all members of this sub-committee.
To come back to Joseph Sandler: he is admired for his unique and 
innovative openness to all kinds of different forms of research in 
psychoanalysis as well as for his engagement in building bridges 
and creating dialogue between psychoanalysts working in their 
private offices, psychoanalytic researchers in universities and other 
institutions, and non-psychoanalytic researchers and intellectuals. 
This attitude cannot be taken for granted: the dialogue among psy-
choanalysts with diffferent convictions in the field of psychoanalyic 
research cannot always be described as open, friendly, and produc-
tive. And often a withdrawal into an exclusively psychoanalytic 
exchange within the psychoanalytic societies is like a form of seduc-
tion for all of us. Reading this volume you will recognize that a with-
drawal into the psychoanalytical ivory tower often might be more 
convenient than to confront ourselves with intensive controversial 
discourses in the non-psychoanalytical scientific community. We 
will touch on the conflictual discussions on ADHD in this respect, 
which often are connected with intensive affects, devaluations, 
and even paranoid suspicion. To mention just one example: some 
psychoanalysts are deeply concerned about the dramatic increase 

PREFACE   xi
of medication in the case of children with ADHD. (From 1993 to 
2006, there was a 3,591% increase in medication in this area, from 
34 kg to 1,221 kg of medication per year.) Some authors talk about 
the danger of a ‘medicalization of social problems’. Others, par-
ticularly the representatives of the pharmacological industry, still 
postulate, conversely, that we have an under-supply of medication. 
Not offering medication to an ADHD child would be, according to 
this opinion, unethical, and could be compared to refusing to offer 
insulin to a child suffering from diabetes. In this volume we will 
argue the importance of psychoanalysts engaging in this debate. 
It will be shown that psychoanalysis—due to the richness of clinical 
experiences and conceptualizations on early developments and its 
disturbances—have something unique to offer for a deepening of 
the understanding of children suffering from so-called ADHD and 
other developmental disturbances.
With this volume we would like to contribute to a more intensive 
engagement of psychoanalysts in this field. We are very sad that one 
outstanding psychoanalyst and researcher, who has been a model for 
such an engagement for us, Stuart Hauser, unfortunately died sud-
denly in 2008. He was the Chair of the Sub-committee for Empirical 
Research and should have opened the ninth Joseph Sandler Research 
Committee. His death is a great loss for all of us and for the psycho-
analytic community in general. We are dedicating this volume to 
him, especially as many of his most important empirical and clinical 
studies focused on early development and its disturbances. His last 
book, co-authored with Allen and Golden (2006), was devoted to 
one of the most central research questions of this volume: the ques-
tion as to why some of the children who have gone through severe 
infantile traumatizations develop more or less ‘normally’, while oth-
ers become seriously ill. It is the question which nowadays is dis-
cussed in the so-called ‘resiliency research’
Hauser et al.  report on their follow-up studes of late adolescents 
who had been hospitalized in a psychiatric clinic because of drug 
abuse, violence and/or suicidality. In the High Valley Resilience Study  
Stuart Hauser and his co-workers had interviewed 150 teenagers 
each year between 1978 and 1983. Half of them had been hospitalized 
in the Children’s Center of High Valley Hospital, a psychiatric insti-
tution. Around 24 children and adolescents from different milieus 
and different parts of the US had been treated there. Their stay was 

xii  PREFACE
expensive but mostly payed for by public institutions. Some of the 
young people suffered from a psychosis or an autistic disease, many 
of them from severe depression. Some had neurological symptoms 
(for example, the so-called Tourette syndrome). But all of them 
shared one commonality: they had an uncontrollable anger and rage 
inside of them and were highly violent.
According to the authors this was one reason why clear rules 
and ‘punishments’ were indispensible in this institution. The most 
important rule was that everyone should talk about emotions. The 
children were not allowed to withdraw from the social group; they 
were forced to remain in contact with the others. ‘There was no 
escape from unit society, because unit society—for the kids who 
could learn to stand it—was the basic instrument of the Center’s 
healing works.’
For Stuart Hauser and his co-workers the most surprising result 
of their follow-up interviews was that some of these children, in 
spite of the pessimistic prognoses, developed into ‘normal adults’. 
In order to understand these findings, 16 of the late adolescents 
were investigated in great detail. This revealed that none of them 
had actually ‘recovered’ from their severe crises during adolescence. 
The researchers summarize their findings in four extensive and very 
impressive case studies.
For years professionals explained similar positive developments 
by postulating the particularly strong personalities of such children 
who, it was argued, due to a surprising genetic potentiality, had 
the strength to adapt to reality in spite of severe traumatizations. 
Hauser, Allen and Golden characterize this position as an idealiza-
tion. They prefer a different definition of resiliency:
For children of adversity are wounded, often severely. To imply 
otherwise is to deny the acuteness of suffering in children, who 
don’t come  resilient but become  resilient— after they have been 
hurt. There is no shield that keeps them safe from all harms, no 
intrinsic toughness such as the older terms imply. It is not the 
illusory invulnerability of resilient children that should com-
mand attention and respect, but their powers of self-healing. 
And these are powers that vary with circumstance: people’s 
styles of adaptation change and evolve over their lifetimes.

PREFACE   xiii
In order to speak of ‘resiliency’, two conditions have to be 
fullfilled: i) a person must develop more or less normally and ii) 
this person must have been exposed to high risk, severe unhap-
piness and/or suffering and was able to overcome this situation 
by their own efforts.
In the High Valley Resilience Study  13% of the late adolescents had 
been diagnosed as ‘resilient’ according to objective test results. The 
interviews with these ‘resilient adolescents’ showed narratives more 
complex, vivid and clearer than the ones of the non-resilient ado-
lescents. They also contained sequences in which the adolescent 
reflected in a different way about their own part and responsibili-
ties for the former severe crises. Stuart Hauser and his co-authors 
interprete these findings as an indicator that these resilient adole-
sents had memories and representations of at least one good 
inner object due to at least one positive object relationship during 
childhood. This good relationship had enabled them to believe in 
‘something good in this world’ in spite of all the traumatic cruelty 
which they had gone through. They had helped them to believe 
in the ‘ Prinzip Hoffnung ’ (Ernst Bloch), the principle of hope, and 
to not resign completely or give up a basic wish for a better life. 
Therefore resiliency, accoring to Stuart Hauser, cannot develop by 
the child‘s inner world alone: it is dependent on some supporting 
object relations in their outside reality.
For the following discussion in this volume these findings are 
extremely important. It is also impressive that one of the most con-
vincing case studies is also connected to the so-called ADHD. Pete, 
one of the extremely violent children in the book, had also been 
diagnosed as ‘hyperactive’. The interviews with him—up to the age 
of 25—illustrate how important it had been for him that, in spite of 
the most severe and violent crises, both of his parents did not with-
draw from him completely but, within their limits, tried to keep a 
basic positive relationship with their difficult and aggressive child. 
This partially good object relationship enabled Pete to finally ‘for-
give’ them their failures during his upbringing and to see his own 
part in his crises. He sees that he was ‘an extremely difficult child’ 
and now, in his late adolescence, is able to take responsibility for his 
own behaviour.

xiv  PREFACE
Taking responsibility was always one of Pete’s strong suits and 
it still is. […] The adult Pete knows that relationships are the 
psychological work that remains to him. And he looks forward 
to it. He knows what relationships can give him, if he will let it: 
I look for the best in a person and I try to learn something from 
them. This is exciting to him: Those people turn me on. And 
then his battle cry, and the battle cry of resilient kids all over: 
Because, Jesus, that’s the way it should be …
(Hauser et al.  2006)
Medications would not have allowed Pete to become resilient: it 
was only human relationships (in his family and later to the staff in 
the clinic) that helped him to develop the coping possibilities with 
his life that he did in spite of all his sufferings, vulnerabilities, and 
traumatizations.
This is one of the main messages in all the contributions of this 
volume. In this sense we feel very grateful to the enormous engage-
ment and outstanding and courageous findings of Stuart Hauser. 
We will try to take up his engagement with traumatized children 
and adolescents, and his attempts to understand their sufferings and 
struggles to overcome them, as a sensitive psychoanalyst and gifted 
researcher.

xvACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank all the authors of this volume for their most 
interesting contributions and the good cooperation. We are grateful 
to the International Psychoanalytical Association and to the Sigmund-
Freud-Institute for giving us the chance to organize the Joseph 
Sandler Research Conference on the topic of this volume. We also 
thank Jannine Kuhlewey, Renate Stebahne and Ute Ochtendung for 
helping us organizing this conference as well as for preparing this 
publication.  Finally special thanks to all the different translators 
who—in spite of the time pressure—offered us their professional-
ism in order to produce a „real English book“. Many thanks to all 
of them!



xviiABOUT THE EDITORS AND CONTRIBUTORS
Jorge L. Ahumada , Supervising and Training Analyst, Argentine 
Psychoanalytic Association. Distinguished Fellow, British Psycho-
analytical Society. Mary S. Sigourney Awardee, 1996. Editor for 
Latin America, The International Journal of Psychoanalysis , 1993–1998. 
Author of The Logics of the Mind: A Clinical View  (Karnac 2001) and 
over forty papers published in eight languages.
Luisa C. Busch de Ahumada  is a full member of the Buenos Aires 
Psychoanalytic Association and an International Psychoanalytical 
Association (IPA)-certified child psychoanalyst. Her clinical papers 
on child dynamics have been published in English, Spanish, French, 
German, and Italian.
Jorge Canestri  is a training and supervising analyst for the Italian 
Psychoanalytical Association and for the Argentine Psychoanalytic 
Association. He is also Professor of Psychology of Health at the 
Roma 3 University, co-author of The Babel of the Unconscious: Mother 
Tongue and Foreign Languages in the Psychoanalytic Dimension  and co-
editor (with Marianne Leuzinger-Bohleber and Anna Ursula Dreher) 
of Pluralism and Unity? Methods of Research in Psychoanalysis and of 
Psychoanalysis: From Practice to Theory.

xviii  ABOUT THE EDITORS AND CONTRIBUTORS
William B. Carey , M.D., is a paediatrician educated at the Harvard 
Medical School and the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia. He 
spent 31 years in primary care. For the last 20 years he has been Clin-
ical Professor of Pediatrics back at CHOP . He received the Aldrich 
Award in Child Development from the American Academy of Pedi-
atrics and was elected to the Institute of Medicine of the National 
Academy of Sciences.
Roberto Doria-Medina , Prof. Dr., Chair, Dept. Mental Health, Uni-
versity Hospital. Full Professor, School of Medicine, University of 
Buenos Aires. Co-Chair, Latin America, Programme Committee, 
International Psychoanalytic Congress 2011. Past Editor of Revista de 
Psicoanálisis , Libro Anual de Psicoanálisis , and Revista Latinoamericana de 
Psicoanálisis.  Past Member of the Editorial Board L A, The International 
Journal of Psychoanalysis.  Past Chair, Department History of Psychoa-
nalysis. Training Analyst, Argentine Psychoanalytical Association.
Anna Ursula Dreher  is a psychoanalyst and supervisor in private 
practice in Frankfurt am Main, trained in the German Psychoana-
lytic Association. Member of the Research Committee of the IPA 
(sub-committee: conceptual research). Author of publications on the 
foundations of research in psychoanalysis, conceptual research, and 
basic psychoanalytic concepts.
Peter Fonagy , PhD FBA is Freud Memorial Professor of Psychoa-
nalysis and Head of the Research Department of Clinical, Educa-
tional and Health Psychology at University Collage London. He is 
Chief Executive at the Anna Freud Centre, London. He is a clinical 
psychologist and a training and supervising analyst in the British 
Psycho-Analytical in child and adult analysis. His clinical inter-
ests centre around issues of borderline psychopathology, violence, 
and early attachment relationships. His work attempts to integrate 
empirical research with psychoanalytic theory. He holds a number 
of important positions, which include chairing the Postgraduate 
Centre of the International Psychoanalytic Association and Fellow-
ship of the British Academy.
Ilse Grubrich-Simitis  is a training analyst of the German 
Psychoanalytical Association and is working in private practice in 
Frankfurt a.M. She is a member of the IPA Research Subcommittee 
for Conceptual Research and of the IPA Committee of History of Psy-
choanalysis. She was a member of the IPA Research Advisory Board 

ABOUT THE EDITORS AND CONTRIBUTORS   xix
1997–2007. She is an editor of Sigmund Freud’s works and letters 
in German. Her main research fields are Freud research; the history 
of psychoanalysis; and clinical and theoretical work on trauma and 
severe traumatization, especially the second generation of holocaust 
survivors.
Charles Hanly  is in full-time psychoanalytic practice; a training 
and supervising analyst in the Canadian Institute of Psychoanalysis 
(Toronto Branch); and a Professor Emeritus (philosophy) University 
of Toronto. He has published a number of books including Psychoa-
nalysis and Philosophy, Existentialism and Psychoanalysis,  and Method in 
Applied Psychoanalysis , along with numerous articles in major inter-
national journals, and chapters in books on clinical psychoanalysis, 
psychoanalytic theory, and applied psychoanalysis. He is President-
elect of the International Psychoanalytical Association.
Angela Joyce,  Training Analyst and Fellow of the Institute of Psycho-
analysis, London; Child Psychoanalyst; at the Anna Freud Centre in 
London she is a Consultant Parent Infant Psychotherapist in the pio-
neering Parent Infant Project; and Project Lead (training) in the child 
psychotherapy service. She has co-edited the forthcoming Reading 
Winnicott  with Lesley Caldwell, which will be published by Routledge 
in the Teaching Series of the New Library of Pyschoanalysis.
Gerd Lehmkuhl , full professor for child and adolescent psychiatry 
at the University of Cologne,  specialist for neurology, child- and 
adolescent psychiatry, psychotherapy and psychoanalysis. Since 
October 1988 director of the clinic and outdoor clinic for psychiatry 
and psychotherapy for children and adolescents of the University 
of Cologne. Psychoanalytical training at the Alfred Adler Institute 
Cologne/Aachen, training analyst (DGIP , DGPPT, DAGG), respnsi-
ble editor of the Zeitschrift für Individualpsychologie, co-editor of the 
Zeitschrift für Kinder- und Jugendpsychiatrie und Psychotherapie.
Marianne Leuzinger-Bohleber  is a training analyst in the German 
Psychoanalytical Association, former Chair of the Research Sub-
committees for Conceptual Research, and a member of the Swiss 
Psychoanalytical Society. Vice Chair of the Research Board of the IPA, 
Full Professor for Psychoanalytic Psychology at the University of 
Kassel and head Director of the Sigmund-Freud-Institut, Frankfurt/
Main. Her main research fields include epistemology and methods 
of clinical and empirical research in psychoanalysis, interdisciplinary 

xx  ABOUT THE EDITORS AND CONTRIBUTORS
discouse with embodied cognitive science, educational sciences, 
and modern German literature.
Björn Salomonsson  is a training and child psychoanalyst at the 
Swedish Psychoanalytical Society, Stockholm. He runs a research 
project at the Child and Adolescent Psychiatric Unit, Karolinska 
Institute, investigating the results of psychoanalytic mother–infant 
treatments. Björn has published papers on containment, the analy-
sis of children with ADHD, infant–mother psychoanalysis, the aes-
thetic experience and, together with Johan Norman, on analytic case 
presentation according to the weaving thoughts method. From 2001 
to 2006, he was chair of the Child Forum of the European Psycho-
analytic Federation. He is a member of the Societé Européenne pour 
la Psychanalyse de l‘Enfant et de l‘Adolescent, Paris.
Adelheid Staufenberg  Study of the German language and litera-
ture, sociology, science of the politics, state exam, and internship. 
Freelance active in the pedagogic area and adult’s education. Edu-
cation in the institute for analytic child- and youth psychotherapy 
in Frankfurt am Main, practising and working in her practice since 
1996, lecturer in the education and continuing education. Coopera-
tion, amongst others, in the ‘prevention and intervention study in 
order to prevent psychosocial integration disturbances (in particular 
from ADHD)’ in the Sigmund-Freud-Institut.
Annette Streeck-Fischer  is director of the department ‘Clinical 
psychotherapy of children and adolescents’ at Asklepios Fachklini-
kum Tiefenbrunn/Güettingen. She is Professor of Clinical Psychol-
ogy and Psychoanalysis at International Psychoanalytic University 
(IPU) in Berlin. She is training and supervising analyst at Lou-
Andreas-Salomé-Institut Goettingen and member of DPG. She is 
editor of the journal Praxis der Kinderpsychologie und Kinderpsychi-
atrie. Since 2007 she is president elect of the International Society 
of Adolescent Psychiatry and Psychotherapy (ISAPP). Her interests 
centre on adolescence, violence, trauma, and maltreatment.
Mary Target  PhD is Professor of Psychoanalysis at University Col-
lege London, and Professional Director of the Anna Freud Centre, 
London. She is a Clinical Associate Professor in the Yale University 
School of Medicine. She is a Fellow of the Institute of Psycho-Analysis 
in London, and maintains a half-time adult psychoanalytic practice.

PART I
INTRODUCTION



3CHAPTER ONE
Controversies on different approaches 
in psychoanalytic research on early 
development and ADHD
Marianne Leuzinger-Bohleber, Jorge Canestri 
and Mary Target
1 Introductory remarks
Surprisingly, psychoanalysts have only during the past few years 
actively engaged in the on-going and very important controversial 
discussions on attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) (for 
example, the casebook on learning disabilities by Rothstein and 
Glenn, 1999; the special volume of Psychoanalytic Inquiry, 2002; and 
the panel on ADHD and trauma at the IPA Congress in Rio 2005 
reported by Sugarman, 2006 and at the IPA Congress in Chicago, 
2009, summarized by Sugarman, 2010).1 Carney (2002: 301) writes 
in his prologue to this volume: ‘Not so long ago, some practition-
ers both inside and outside psychoanalysis discouraged the use of 
psychodynamic treatment for patients with AD/HD.’ Salomonsson 
(2004: 132) agrees, writing: ‘Psychoanalysis is an often-neglected 
treatment method for children with neuropsychiatric disorders.’
There may be many reasons for the increasing interest in this 
topic over the past few years. We wish to mention just four possible 

4  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
ones, which for us were essential in the decision to become involved 
in this topic:
 i. The dialogue between psychoanalysis and contemporary 
neurobiology/brain research opens a fascinating window on an 
old problem in European culture: the mind–body problem. This 
exchange also promises to enlarge the understanding of psychic 
problems probably connected with some neurobiologically 
founded pathologies, as postulated for ADHD.
 ii. Twin studies postulate a strong genetic component in ADHD 
(see, for example, Faraone et al., 2005, Romanos et al., 2008). Only 
during the last years could epigenetic researchers empirically 
demonstrate that early traumatization might strongly influence 
the ‘triggering’ of gene disposition (see, for example, Caspi 
et al ., 2003; Schulte-Körne and Allgaier, 2008; Goldberg, 
2009; Risch et al., 2009; Rutter, 2009; Soumi, 2010). Therefore 
psychoanalysts feel more reassured to treat children with 
ADHD psychoanalytically: They are experts in understanding 
and treating children with early trauma, independent of their 
genetic disposition.
 iii. New developments in psychoanalytic theory, taking up findings 
from empirical infant, attachment, and memory research, offer 
alternative conceptualizations and techniques for treating 
early disturbances in affect regulation, and in the development 
of symbolization and mentalization—all of which are central 
dysfunctions in ADHD.
 iv. The growing ‘competition’ with other therapeutic approaches 
(for example, medication with Ritalin®, cognitive behavioural 
programmes, and so forth) and the political realities of a modern 
zeitgeist in the Western world probably motivate many self-
critical psychoanalysts to engage intensely in relevant public 
and professional debates. One of these is about ADHD, which 
is considered to be one of the most heated controversies that 
child psychiatry has ever gone through (see Riedesser, 2006).
These heated debates on the medical treatment of even very young 
children were one of the main reasons that the Sigmund-Freud-
Institut in Frankfurt conceptualized the so-called Frankfurt Preven-
tion Study (FPS) in cooperation with the Institute for Psychoanalytic 

CONTROVERSIES ON DIFFERENT APPROACHES   5
Treatments of Children and Adolescents in Frankfurt. The 
representative, cluster randomized Frankfurt Prevention Study2 was 
carried out from September 2003 to September 2006. In order to be 
able to draw a representative sample of roughly n = 500 children in 
the prevention/intervention group and a control-comparison group 
of another n = 500 children, we had to perform a basic assessment in 
all public kindergartens in Frankfurt (114 kindergartens with around 
4,500 children). The main hypothesis of the study was that a two-
year psychoanalytic (and non-psychopharmacological) prevention 
and intervention programme would result in a statistically signifi-
cant decrease in the number of children suffering from psychosocial 
disturbances (particularly aggressive conflicts, frequently the main 
problem of ADHD children in social situations) in their first year 
of school (compared with the control group). The psychoanalytic 
prevention and intervention programme consisted of several com-
ponents based on the psychoanalytic understanding of ADHD: psy-
choanalytic supervision of the kindergarten teams, a weekly offering 
of a psychoanalytically oriented educational programme for individ-
ual children or the children’s group, including a violence prevention 
programme called FAUSTLOS (‘NO FISTS’; a modification of the 
US American programme SECOND STEPS) developed by Cierpka 
and his group (see Cierpka and Schick, 2006); psychoanalytic thera-
pies (always including the parents) offered to children with severe 
psychopathologies (including ADHD) mostly in the Kindergartens 
themselves; consultations and educational courses for parents; and 
finally intensive collaboration with medical doctors, child psychia-
trists, mental health and welfare institutions and potential schools, 
if necessary.
In the meantime, we have obtained statistical results which support 
our main hypothesis: the level of aggression and anxiety of the chil-
dren in the prevention group has decreased significantly compared 
with the control group (interestingly, there is a statistically signifi-
cant decrease of hyperactivity only in girls). We have published these 
results in detail in other papers (see Leuzinger-Bohleber et al. , 2007, 
2008). In this introduction we only want to mention one aspect that is 
important for the topic of this volume. Seen from a psychoanalytical 
perspective, we found several different psychodynamic backgrounds 
with a final common pathway to ADHD syndrome according to 
DSM–IV: a) known brain damage (due to organic traumata during 

6  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
birth, an accident, encephalitis, and so on); b) early emotional neglect; 
c) personal and family trauma (for example, in refugees’ families); 
d) chronic under-stimulation of highly talented children in kinder-
garten; e) a mismatch of the temperament of the child with their pri-
mary caregiver, or object; f) a mismatch of family culture with the 
cultural ‘rules’ of the host country (for example, a Moroccan family 
living in Germany); and g) growing up with a chronically depressed 
mother (or ‘dead mother’, according to André Green3).
To summarize: in this large empirical and clinical study it was 
shown that in all of the children investigated, early disturbances of 
affect regulation had—in different and idiosyncratic combinations—
led to behaviour then assigned an ADHD diagnosis. This is one of 
the major reasons that we argue for psychoanalysis to get involved 
in the public discussion of diagnosis and treatment for this group 
of children. Causation does not necessarily mean that treatment is 
required in the same domain, but we need to take seriously a devel-
opmental model which can make sense of such diverse aetiological 
pathways.
To this end, we decided to devote the ninth Joseph Sandler 
Research Conference 2008 to this topic: Early development and its 
disturbances: clinical, conceptual and empirical research on AD/HD and 
other psychopathologies . In this volume we are publishing some of 
the main papers given at this conference, in combination with some 
papers dealing with epistemological and methodological problems 
connected to research in this field.
We will begin our introduction with some remarks on the on-
going public and professional debates (2). In the following section 
we would like to summarize briefly some of the consequences of dif-
ferent theoretical positions towards the preferred therapy of ADHD 
children (3). First the so-called ‘multimodal treatment of ADHD’ 
(cognitive-behavioural treatment in combination with medica-
tion) and the implications for diagnosis and therapy will be shortly 
summarized (3.1) in order to contrast this view with psychoana-
lytical concepts (3.2). We think that the richness of psychoanalytic 
concepts, encompassing possible idiosyncratic biographical and 
psychodynamic as well as genetic and biological roots of ADHD, 
seems to be in impressive concordance with contemporary neuro-
biological memory research (4). In the penultimate section we will 

CONTROVERSIES ON DIFFERENT APPROACHES   7
illustrate this thesis with some short case examples (5). In the last 
section we will summarize the various approaches of the different 
authors of this book toward investigating early development and its 
disturbances (6).
2 The dramatic increase in treating ADHD4 by medication 
(for example, Ritalin®)—a warning sign of medicalizing 
contemporary social problems seen from a historical 
background?
ADHD is one of the most frequent diagnoses of children and adoles-
cents nowadays (see, for example, Staufenberg, in press). There also is 
a high comorbidity between ADHD and other psychopathologies, for 
example, depressions (see, for example, Bharwaj and Goodyer, 2009: 
178). Medical treatment has continously and dramatically increased 
since the 1990s. The prescription of methylphenidate (Medicinet, 
Concerta, Ritalin, and others) has increased from 0.3 million DDD 
(daily defined dose) in 1990 to 46 million DDD in 2007. In Germany 
34 kg methylphenidate was sold annually in drug stores in 1993; in 
2009 this had risen to 1,735 kg (an increase of 5,103%) (Bundesinstitut 
für Arzneimittel und Medizinprodukte [BfArM], 2010).
Mattner (2006), Amft (2006), and Gerspach (2006) give a short over-
view of the historical and societal context in which this increased use 
of Ritalin® and other psychopharmacological medication for children 
could be understood. Mattner (2006) elaborates that the search for 
neurophysiological reasons to explain socially deviant behaviour has 
a long tradition in European countries, particularly in Germany.5
Summarizing the history of this diagnosis in child psychiatry in 
the USA, Gilmore (2000) reports similar findings. George Still (1902: 
266) first observed a group of children in his practice ‘who showed 
a pattern of aggressiveness, resistance to discipline, excessive emo-
tionality, little “inhibitory volition”, “lawlessness”, spitefulness, and 
cruelty: these children were also notable for their impaired atten-
tion, overactivity, and a defect in motor control’. This syndrome was 
attributed to an underlying neurological deficiency, and, consistent 
with the then current view of behavioural disorders, the influence 
of environment was largely ignored (Gilmore, 2000: 1,266–67). Inter-
est in this disorder grew after the encephalitis outbreak of 1917–18, 

8  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
when many children, after their recovery from this illness, showed 
impairment in attention, regulation of activity, and impulse control, 
the now so-called ‘postencephalitic behaviour disorder’. Laufer 
and Denhoff (1957) characterized a subgroup of these children as 
showing ‘hyperkinetic impulse disorder’, which was attributed to 
a postulated brain mechanism, namely ‘poor filtering of stimuli’. 
These children were often treated with psychoactive drugs. Later, 
the term ‘minimal brain damage’ continued to be fashionable. In the 
1960s the more modest term ‘minimal brain dysfunction’ was more 
widely used. Gilmore (2000) agrees with Mattner (2006) that both 
these diagnostic terms ultimately:
yielded to scientific objections, as it became clear that many 
children and many syndromes were being lumped together 
without heuristic or prescriptive benefit under the umbrella of 
a pseudoscientific classification. As part of the growing trend 
towards descriptive, rather than etiological, classifications, the 
diagnostic wastebasket was broken down into observable and 
verifiable deficits.
(Gilmore cited in Barkley, 1990: 10)
The specific ‘hyperactive child syndrome’ (Laufer and Denhoff, 
1957) or ‘hyperactive reaction of childhood’ (DSM-II) reappeared as 
the official nomenclature for children with features of impulsive and 
aggressive behaviour and poor attention spans. While demonstrable 
brain damage could produce this syndrome, the majority of children 
so diagnosed were without known injury. Nonetheless, brain mech-
anisms responsible for these behavioural ‘lags’ were postulated, and 
prognosis was felt to be good on the basis of developmental matura-
tion; that is, puberty was viewed as a watershed after which there 
was a good likelihood of resolution. Environmental factors were 
de-emphasized (Gilmore, 2000: 1,267–68). According to Gilmore 
particularly, the research done by Virginia Douglas and her group 
at McGill University led to the development of a paradigm which 
renamed the syndrome as ‘attention deficit disorder’ by the time 
that DSM-III was published in 1980. In the following years, environ-
mental toxicity—food additives or technical over-stimulation—was 
also seen as relevant for ADD and the learning disabilities of these 

CONTROVERSIES ON DIFFERENT APPROACHES   9
children. Learning disabilities were formally recognized by the US 
government with the Public Law 94–142 in 1975. Children diagnosed 
with ADD—as one form of learning disability—were offered a mul-
timodal treatment approach, which included medication, special 
classroom programmes, dietary management, and parent counsel-
ling. In the 1980s—on the basis of newer studies—the classifica-
tion of ADD without hyperactivity was dropped in DSM-III-R and 
renamed as the syndrome of Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Dis-
order, linking it with Oppositional Defiant Disorder and Conduct 
Disorder under the Disruptive Disorders in Childhood. It has been 
retained as such in DSM-IV .6
Gilmore (2000) mentions that in the past few decades, ADHD has 
achieved validity as a discrete diagnostic entity through epidemio-
logical characterization (that is, it shows strong hereditary patterns 
and clusters with other specific psychiatric disorders) and through 
an increasing number of promising neuroanatomical studies that 
further differentiate sub-populations (Cantwell, 1996). Research into 
neurotransmitters has also burgeoned, although it has so far failed 
to yield the anticipated solution. In a ten-year review of the disorder 
for the Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psy-
chiatry , Dennis Cantwell (1996: 979) emphasizes that ADHD is ‘one 
of the most important disorders that child and adolescent psychia-
trists treat’, and that it is a robust disorder with a high prevalence 
and a serious lifetime morbidity that responds best to multimodal 
intervention. He asserts unequivocally that ‘psychosocial factors are 
not thought to play a primary etiological role’, although (presum-
ably secondary) negative mother–child interactions are commonly 
observed (Cantwell cited in Gilmore, 2000: 1,269). A similar position 
is taken by Barkley (2002), one of the most frequently quoted experts 
in the field of ADHD:
The central psychological deficits in those with ADHD have 
now been linked through numerous studies using various sci-
entific methods to several specific brain regions (the frontal lobe, 
its connections to the basal ganglia, and their relationship to the 
central aspects of the cerebrellum). Most neurological studies 
find that as a group those with ADHD have less brain electrical 
activity and show less reactivity to stimulation in one or more 
of these regions. And neuro-imaging studies of groups of those 

10  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
with ADHD also demonstrate relatively smaller areas of brain 
matter and less metabolic activity of this brain matter than is the 
case in control groups used in these studies. These same psy-
chological deficits in inhibition and attention have been found 
in numerous studies of identical and fraternal twins conducted 
across various countries (US, Great Britain, Norway, Australia, 
etc.) to be primarily inherited. The genetic contribution to these 
traits is routinely found to be among the highest for any psy-
chiatric disorder (70–95% of trait variation in the population), 
nearly approaching the genetic contribution to human height. 
One gene has recently been reliably demonstrated to be associ-
ated wiht this disorder and the search for more is underway by 
more than 12 different scientific teams worldwide at this time.
(Barkley cited in Staufenberg, in press: 40)
Mattner (2006) and many other authors question these conclusions 
(for example, see Timimi and Leo, 2009). Mattner attributes such ‘bio-
logical explanations for psychosocial problems of AD/HD children’ 
to historical and social factors. He quotes, for example, Crary (1999), 
who showed in detail that only during the beginning of the 19th cen-
tury, the ‘industrial century’, did it become necessary for children 
as well as adults to develop the capability to ‘show attention in a 
disciplined way’, ‘to concentrate’, and to comply with a joint process 
of production (without destructive and aggressive conflicts). Only 
since then have ‘attention’, ‘concentration’, and the capability to ‘sit 
still for hours in learning situations in school or at work’ become 
socially required virtues. Mattner therefore concludes: ‘Probably 
the epidemic increase of psychopathologies in children with AD/
HD indicates in a seismographical way the sufferings and problems 
of children in our postmodern times, which escape in our analyses 
from a purely neurobiological perspective’ (2006: 18). In a similar 
line of argument, Amft (2006) has postulated that Ritalin® and other 
medicines can—without any doubt—be of help for some children 
suffering from ADHD, particularly given certain social conditions 
at school that allow for the de-escalation of conduct problems. At 
the same time, he warns of the neglect of family, social, and environ-
mental factors:
Without any doubt the application of Ritalin® and other psychop-
harmacological medication has a highly seductive character 

CONTROVERSIES ON DIFFERENT APPROACHES   1 1
because they are very efficient, fast in their effects, not very 
costly and can adapt ‘difficult children’ to the everyday require-
ments of schools in our Western societies … According to this 
argumentation it seems even unethical not to hand out these 
medicines to children with AD/HD … Such a radically biologi-
cal explanation of social problems of children does not consider 
the influence of factors of the so-called ‘changed childhood’ 
(‘veränderte Kindheit’) in our Western societies with its well-
known features of broken families, early emotional neglect of 
children, the ‘clash of civilizations and values’, the influence of 
media as well as the complex realities of growing up in a glo-
balized multicultural world etc.
(Amft 2006: 119ff., translation by the authors; on this topic, 
see also Garlichs and Leuzinger-Bohleber, 
1999, Ahrbeck, 2007)
Therefore, Mattner, Gerspach, and Amft all issue a plea for critical 
and differentiated analyses of the multiple fields of problems that 
children in post-industrial societies grow up with (see Sennett, 1998), 
and on this subject we agree with these authors; in talking about 
ADHD, social and cultural factors should be taken as seriously as 
the findings from modern neurobiology and brain research.
3 Controversional theoretical positions with immense 
implications for treatments of ADHD children
To summarize briefly:
The heated discussions of different explanations and treatments 
of ADHD children seem to have two poles:
 I. ADHD is seen as a primarily genetically determined illness 
of certain brain regions and functions which can be efficiently 
treated by medication like methyphenidate and amphetamines. 
Environmental factors may play an additional but not a 
primarily important role and should be measured ‘objectively’ 
(like e.g. the influence of smoking to the embryo and a possible 
vulnerability to ADHD due to this factor). Anthough the 
authors often talk about a ‘multimodal form of treatment’, 
medical treatment is at the heart of the interventions.

12  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
 II. ADHD is seen as a complex pattern of behaviour due to
multiple factors determined by different individual, 
biographical (psychodynamic) determinants. Prenatal factors, 
social conditions under which children are growing up, as 
well as problematic or even traumatic experiences within 
early relationships or a mismatch of temperament between the 
primary caregiver and the baby are seen as mainly influential 
although genetic and biological factors (like temperament) 
also may play an important role. Interventions or therapies are 
thus mainly focusing on the individual biographical and social 
factors. A combination with medication may be necessary in the 
sense of an emergency strategy but not as a cure for the factors 
producing ADHD.
These positons mostly determine the strategies which are offered to 
ADHD children and their families in order to help them cope with 
their problems. In the following section we are illustrating just two 
different intervention strategies, which are based on these different 
poles in the understanding of ADHD.
3.1 Multimodal treatment of ADHD (a combination of cognitive 
behavioural and psychopharmacological treatments)
Lehmkuhl and Döpfner (2006), two of the best-known contemporary 
empirical researchers into ADHD in Germany, refer to the guide-
lines of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. 
They appeal for a cautious professional approach to the diagno-
sis and an understanding of the pathogenesis of ADHD based on 
a ‘biopsychosocial model’ . They illustrate this view with a diagram 
illustrating the interaction between ‘causal’ determining factors and 
resulting processes on different levels like the level of biochemis-
try and neurophysiology, neuropsychology, symptoms, interactions, 
and comorbidity.
The primary determining factors are seen in a genetic disposi-
tion which leads to dysfunctions of the neurotransmitter system 
(for example, dopamine system) and other cerebral dysfunctions. 
Possible additional factors could be substances in the food of the 
child or brain injury. These causal factors lead to disturbances in 
the regulation system of the self (lack of impulse control, and so 

CONTROVERSIES ON DIFFERENT APPROACHES   1 3
forth), in working memory, the regulation of affects, motivation and 
attention, the automatization of language, and the development of 
sequences of actions. All these processes then lead to the hyperki-
netic symptoms (attention deficit, impulsivity, hyperactivity). These 
symptoms in turn lead to an increase in negative interactions with 
people important to the child. Unfavourable factors in school and in 
the family may additonally (but not causally) increase the problems. 
Comorbid symptoms such as deficits in academic achievements, 
aggressive behaviour, and emotional distrurbances are the conse-
quences of these processes.
In their treatment they include exclusively psychopharmacologi-
cal and cognitive behavioural methods, sometimes in combination 
with a form of counselling offered to the parents of children with 
ADHD, which also follows cognitive behavioural principles. Their 
Kölner Mutimodale Therapiestudie  was well received by insurance 
companies, medical institutions, and the media. Therefore, in many 
medical journals in Germany as well as in many public reports on 
television, one can read or hear that ‘the combination of cognitive 
behavioural therapy and medication is the only scientifically proven 
treatment for ADHD children’. Sometimes one encounters the opin-
ion that psychodynamic treatments with this group have to be con-
sidered unethical, as the method has not been ‘scientifically proven’ 
according to the criteria of evidence-based medicine.
3.2 A multidimensional, psychoanalytic approach concerning
the genesis, the psychodynamics, prevention, and treatment 
of children suffering from ADHD
In contrast to the opinions held in behavioural therapy and psychia-
try, just briefly outlined above, it is emphasized in psychoanalytic 
publications that attention deficit and hyperactivity are symptoms  
which may at the most be summed up as syndromes  but which should 
not be considered together as a full-blown clinical condition , even if it 
turned out that a genetic disposition actually exists. There are no clear 
borders between ‘normal’ and ‘pathological’ forms of hyperactivity 
and attention deficit. As is generally known, children with ADHD 
are capable of addressing certain tasks with their full attention and 
concentration if they are really interested in them. Therefore, a psy-
choanalytic approach does not attempt the ‘objective measurement 

14  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
and evaluation’ of the symptoms of hyperactivity and attention 
deficit, but aims rather to understand the various personality struc-
tures underlying these symptoms, as well as grasping something of 
the dynamics of the emotional relationships in the families and edu-
cational institutions which may trigger ADHD. We have observed 
different structural levels in children identified as having ADHD, 
and a wide range of divergent object relations, which is why mono-
causal aetiology cannot be assumed (Leuzinger-Bohleber, Staufen-
berg, and Fischmann, 2007). As is generally known, many genetic 
researchers have pointed out that even a genetic disposition does 
not ‘linearly’ generate a phenotype of behaviour, but that it takes 
certain environmental conditions and specific situations (in the case 
of childhood psychopathology, usually very complex early experi-
ences in relationships) to trigger certain gene constellations and thus 
to activate them (see, for example, Stassen et al., 2004a, 2004b; see 
also contemporary discussion in the field of epigenetics, for exam-
ple, Hill, 2009, Goldberg, 2009, Soumi, 2010). In the meantime, there 
have been many empirical clues that a baby’s temperament plays 
an important role in the aetiology of ADHD, especially if there is a 
clash of temperament with the primary attachment figure (usually 
the mother) (see, for example, Emde and Fonagy, 1997; Stern, 1995; 
Beebe and Lachman, 2002; Carey, Fonagy, and Leuzinger-Bohleber in 
this volume). It may be a risk factor if a bubbly baby has a relatively 
quiet mother, above all because this mother will probably have dif-
ficulty in adequately empathizing with her child and regulating its 
affects. However, it has turned out to be empirically very difficult to 
capture differences in temperament in an unequivocal way.
Psychoanalytic retrospective studies indicate that the tolerance of 
the primary attachment figure for the baby’s outbursts, as well as his 
or her ability to soothe, hold, and ‘contain’ the outbursts, play a cen-
tral role in the genesis of ADHD (see Bürgin, 2005; Bürgin and Steck, 
2007; Dammasch, 2006; Fonagy and Target, 2003; Leuzinger-Bohleber 
et al., 2006, Leuzinger-Bohleber, 2009, Sugarman, 2010, Salomonsen, 
2004, 2006). It has been shown that the complex early interactions 
between mothers and children with ADHD are often characterized 
by over- or under-stimulation and intrusive or neglecting mater-
nal behaviour (see Beebe and Lachmann, 2002; Green, 2005). Often, 
the babies seemed to have little choice other than to motivate their 
mothers to deliver the most basic care by showing hyperactive and 

CONTROVERSIES ON DIFFERENT APPROACHES   1 5
over-stimulated behaviour, a pattern which is probably generalized 
later on.
To summarize, despite their theoretical differences, all contempo-
rary psychoanalytic schools share the basic belief that stable psychic 
structures can only develop in adequate and empathic early object 
relations. These need to include a well-functioning regulation of drive 
impulses and affects in the mother, enabling the same to be built up 
in the infant, as well as secure inner borders between self and object 
representations. Moreover, more recent psychoanalytic publications 
stress—apart from a sensitive and empathic mother—the relevance of 
an early relationship for the child with the father (in the sense of early 
triangulation; see Bürgin, 1998; Klitzing, 2002), as well as the father 
showing emotional support for the mother (see inter alia Herzog, 
2001; Metzger, 2000; Dammasch, 2000; Hopf, 2007). ADHD children 
seem to have experienced inadequately stable primary relationships. 
They were not able to develop sufficiently secure inner structures of 
these developmentally vital kinds, and they are deficient in the abil-
ity of self-regulation (see case studies by Dammasch, 2006; Leuzinger 
et al., 2006). Furthermore, they did not have enough compensatory 
relational experiences to enable ‘interactive repair’ for experiences of 
deprivation or the ‘lack of a primary attachment figure’ (see Klitzing, 
2002: 883; Häußler and Hopf, 2002; Heinz, 2002; Lüpke, 2004; Green 
2005, 2006; Hopf, 2009; Laezer in prep).
Authors committed to empirical attachment theory  have presented 
analogous findings and concepts. There has been evidence in many 
studies that maternal sensitivity is an important factor in the predic-
tion of the so-called attachment categories in the first year of life 
(see, for example, Grossmann et al. , 1989). Ainsworth et al.  (1978) 
showed in their empirical studies that mothers reacting sensitively 
to their children’s signals during their first year of life—that is, both 
promptly and sufficiently accurately—tended to have children who 
show secure attachment behaviour  in the so-called Strange Situation 
(a standardized situation to investigate attachment behaviour). 
There is evidence from some studies that children with secure attach-
ment behaviour develop ADHD less frequently during their years at 
elementary school (see, for example, Lüpke, 2006; Salomonsen, 2006; 
Staufenberg, in press).
Fonagy and Target (2002) consider the development of reflec-
tive or mentalization capacities to be a vital pillar of social cognitive 

16  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
competence in children, joining with the regulation of attention and 
emotion expression to enable the child to behave in developmen-
tally appropriate, socialized ways. Difficulties in all three areas are 
characteristic problems of ADHD children; ‘[i]ncapabilities in these 
self-regulatory skills lie at the heart of a specific, genetically linked 
neurological syndrome AD/HD’ (Carney, 2002: 300). Understand-
ing such deficits and trying to modify them in the psychoanalyti-
cally based treatments of children suffering from ADHD is a goal for 
psychoanalysts of all psychoanalytic schools (see also Haubl, 2009; 
Hopf, 2007; Myssior and Mahado, 2008; Nelson, 2002; Reichert, 2010; 
Salomonsen, 2006; Sugarman, 2010).
Staufenberg (in press) and colleagues have even developed a 
‘manual for treating ADHD children’ integrating the different psy-
choanalytical approaches just mentioned. This manual was applied 
in a comparative therapy outcome study on the results of psycho-
analytic compared with cognitive-behaviroal/medication treatment 
already mentioned (see, for example, Laezer, in press).
Thus, in Germany, the psychoanalytic and psychodynamic treat-
ment of children with ADHD is still the most frequent (see, for 
example, fakt KBV). But we urgently need more emprical studies 
showing whether these treatments are effective and ‘ nachhaltig ’ 
(longlasting) even according to the criteria of evidence-based medi-
cine. At the Sigmund-Freud-Institute we are just performing such 
a study comparing the results of psychoanalytical compared with 
cognitive-behavioral/medical treatments of ADHD (see, for exam-
ple, Laezer et al ., 2010; Laezer in press). This extraclinical study 
takes the position that it has always been true to the core of psy-
choanalytic conceptualization that the symptoms of a child should 
be analysed as the products of complex unconscious and conscious 
factors, idiographic biographical factors on the one hand and spe-
cific genetic, biological, and neurobiological determinants on the 
other. Therefore, we agree with many contemporary authors that 
psychoanalysis—as a theory as well as a treatment method—has 
a lot to offer for understanding children with ADHD—and could 
even, once enriched by awareness of the biological determinants, 
be seen as the most comprehensive method and the treatment of 
choice (for example, Carney, 2002; Bürgin, 2005; Bürgin and Roth-
stein, 2002; Gilmore, 2002; Leuzinger-Bohleber, 2009; Sugarman, 
2006; Zabarenko, 2002). But our clinical findings are not sufficient 

CONTROVERSIES ON DIFFERENT APPROACHES   1 7
any more in the current debates on ADHD mentioned above: we 
need to prove them with sound empirical comparative empirical 
studies; a great challenge for contemporary psychoanalysis, but one 
which—if possible to meet—can be instructive.
Let us turn to another important topic of ADHD in the last section 
of our introduction: prevention and early intervention.
4 Prevention and early intervention: Some psychoanalytic 
and neurobiological considerations on psychosocial 
disintegration
The above psychoanalytic concepts on the aetiology of ADHD as well 
as the enormous significance of prevention and intervention in the 
first years of life are in line with interdisciplinary findings, especially 
from neurobiology. In a number of psychiatric and psychoanalytic 
papers, neuroscientific research which seems to be relevant to the 
understanding of ADHD is summarized (see, for example, Barkley, 
1997; Levin, 1997; Gilmore, 2000; Rothstein, 2002; Salomonsson, 2004, 
2007). Zabarenko (2002: 415ff.) mentions three research areas which 
are immediately relevant for ADHD: i) research on attention and 
executive control; ii) learning and neural plasticity; and iii) memory.
Another promising theoretical approach is a contemporary 
understanding of ‘embodied memory and problem solving’, sup-
porting our thesis that the intensive psychoanalytic treatment of 
ADHD children has important advantages to add to exclusively 
medical treatment (see Leuzinger-Bohleber and Pfeifer, 2002, 2006; 
Pfeifer and Scheier, 1999; Pfeifer and Bongard, 2007; Fuchs, Sattel, 
and Henningsen, 2010). In the field of so-called ‘Embodied Cogni-
tive Science’, results of biologically oriented memory research have 
been taken into account which prove that the computer metaphor 
which still forms the basis of many theories on memory is funda-
mentally wrong (for example, when we talk about ‘stores’ contained 
in the long-term memory and from which knowledge is transferred 
to the short-term memory, or a ‘defect’ in the neurotransmitter sys-
tem which has to be ‘restored’ by psychostimulants). Living systems 
are forced to adapt constantly to a continuously changing environ-
ment. In this process, knowledge from earlier situations is used 
but has to be ‘re-written’ again and again and adapted to the new 
situation. Therefore, memory is nowadays understood as an active, 

18  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
creative process of the whole organism based upon sensory-affective 
coordination processes and associated ‘automatic’, constantly adapt-
ing, re-categorizing processes. Thus, memory does not imply purely 
cognitive processes but is always ‘embodied’ (see also Leuzinger-
Bohleber, 2008).
Thus, it can be assumed that even if certain genetic dispositions 
exist, specific early ‘embodied’ interaction experiences in object 
relations must have taken place which ‘trigger’ the development of 
attention deficit and hyperactivity. These early pathological experi-
ences may in turn only be modified or corrected permanently, and 
in the sense of self-regulation of the infantile organism by means of 
new ‘embodied’ experiences, and not by medication supposed to 
adjust a particular malfunction in the brain. In other words, neurobio-
logically and psychically failed developments may largely be corrected or 
at least softened by suitable, adequate, ‘corrective’ experiences with one’s 
objects and the environment.  Although we agree that more research 
is still needed, we assume that such corrective opportunities are 
largely not produced by the medical treatment of ADHD children, 
although it is acknowledged that suppressing disruptive symptoms 
may create a better context for positive interactions.
Jaak Panksepp (1998), a leading neurobiologist and brain 
researcher into emotional development, adds more grounds for a 
similar position dealing with ADHD children. To summarize some 
of his arguments briefly, recent brain-imaging data have revealed 
that the major difference in the brains of individuals with ADHD 
is in the frontal areas.
At the gross structural level, brains of children diagnosed with 
ADHD exhibit a 5% reduction of overall size. There are also some 
neurochemical differences (Soltano, 1998), but none of them is suf-
ficiently large to permit us to conclude that the differences consti-
tute a medically significant abnormality. The neural differences in 
ADHD children have recently been formulated by Barkley (1997) 
and are summarized in Figure 1.
According to this view, the fundamental problem in AD/HD is 
not a deficit in attention, but an abnormally low level of behav-
ioural inhibition, a global function that allows better reflection, 
imagination, empathy and creativity. These abilities promote 
behavioural flexibility, better foresight and a more mature 

CONTROVERSIES ON DIFFERENT APPROACHES   1 9
regulation of behaviour. If we accept the existence of a frontal 
lobe contribution to AD/HD, we still must consider whether 
there are environmental or physical ways to improve such fron-
tal lobe functions permanently.
(Panksepp, 1998: 93)
Medical treatment offers the ‘physical’ possibilities. Without any 
doubt, short-term behavioural improvements occur with psychos-
timulants. The problem is, as many studies have shown, that the 
long-term effects have rarely been evident. When medication is 
terminated, ADHD symptoms typically return, suggesting that the 
children are not learning to manage their lives better. Evidence for 
long-term improvements of cognitive functions and other abilities 
remains practically non-existent (for a summary of such work, see 
Barkley, 1997; Panksepp, 1998: 93). Panksepp then argues that the 
short-term benefits of the treatment with psychostimulants would 
be acceptable if they did not have any negative physical conse-
quences (which have been argued to include a small decrease in the 
rate of physical growth; a relatively rare incidence of seizure, tics, 
Figure 1. A synoptic interpretation of the frontal lobe functions that 
may be deficient in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (adapted 
from Barkley, 1997).

20  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
mania, and delusional tendencies; and the controversial finding of a 
range other difficulties when these children grow up, such as drug 
abuse).
Due to methodological problems, the long-term effects of treat-
ment with psychostimulants can hardly be studied in human beings.7 
Therefore, Panksepp quotes animal studies. There is some evidence 
from these studies that psychostimulants decrease—instead of 
increase—neural plasticity; ‘In general, dopaminergic arousal, as 
can be achieved with psychostimulants, tends to reduce glutamate- 
mediated neural plasticity’ (Panksepp, 1998: 95). Panksepp thus 
pleads for a different strategy in the treatment of ADHD children 
in our societies: to create more possibilities for young children to 
develop the frontal lobe executive functions by playing, and in par-
ticular by playing so-called rough-and-tumble games:
The urge to indulge in rough-and-tumble play is a birthright 
of the mammalian brain … Social play may be an experience-
expectant, or preparatory, process that helps programme higher 
brain areas that will be required later in life. Indeed ‘youth’ 
may have evolved to give complex organisms time to play and 
thereby to exercise that natural skills they will need as adults. 
We already know that as the frontal lobes mature, frequency 
of play goes down … Might access to rough-and-tumble play 
promote frontal lobe maturation?
(Panksepp, 1998: 95–96)
To sum up, like many contemporary brain researchers, Panksepp 
postulates a user-dependent emergence of brain organic changes 
in hyperactivity and attention deficit. Particularly for children born 
with a (probably genetically determined) impulsive temper and 
character, the possibility of engaging in active exploration of their 
environment and in rough-and-tumble play seems to be essential 
in order to develop frontal lobe executive functions. If—for vari-
ous reasons—children do not have sufficient possibilities to engage 
in such exploration and play (due to their early object relations, 
traumatic experiences, or simply environmental factors such as 
the absence of a playground for small children) they may develop 
ADHD. Medication probably does not help to compensate for this 

CONTROVERSIES ON DIFFERENT APPROACHES   2 1
deficit in the frontal lobe executive functions. Organic brain (just like 
psychological) changes can only take place ‘user-dependently’, that 
is, in new playful and explorative situations, and are particularly 
effective if combined with intense, positive emotional relationship 
experiences (see also Damasio, 1994, 2003; Passolt, 2004; Hüther, 
2006; Dawirs et al., 1992; Moll et al., 2000; Leuzinger-Bohleber, Roth, 
Buchheim, 2008; Doidge, 2007; Leuzinger-Bohleber, Röckerath, and 
Strauss, 2010; Fuchs, Sattel, and Henningsen, 2010).
These considerations are very consistent with psychoanalytic 
concepts of the development of disturbances such as ADHD, as will 
be discussed in several papers of this volume. The following short 
case examples, mostly taken from the Frankfurt Prevention Study , 
may illustrate this point.
5 Some short case studies
One aim of the Frankfurt Prevention Study  was to contribute to a dif-
ferentiation of the ADHD diagnosis by looking at it from a psycho-
analytic point of view. As briefly discussed above, ADHD seems to 
have become a ‘fashionable diagnosis’. All over the world, 10 mil-
lion children are treated with amphetamines after having been 
diagnosed with ADHD. In Germany, 400,000 young people receive 
regular medication for this problem—and that number is increasing. 
The estimated prevalence rate at the age of 6 to 18 years is between 
2 and 6% (BMGS, 2002).
We have been able to gather numerous and extensive single case 
observations as well as statistical data from the original sample of 
500 children in our prevention/intervention group. Discussing our 
observations, we have found different subgroups of the children 
who had been diagnosed with ADHD according to the criteria of 
the Döpfner and the Conner Scales (both instruments are based 
on DSM-IV criteria). In other words, on a descriptive level, all the 
children suffered—according to DSM-IV—from ADHD. Neverthe-
less, it does not seem very helpful for a deepened understanding of 
these children to stick to a ‘meaningful discrete diagnostic entity’ 
(Gilmore, 2000: 1,258). From a psychoanalytic perspective, a more 
dynamic, precise perception of each child’s idiosyncratic psycholog-
ical and psychosocial situation offers, in our view, a better base for 
adequate treatment.

22  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
Therefore, we would like to outline some of these distinctions 
subsumed under the syndrome ADHD by defining different sub-
groups. As discussed above, from a psychoanalytic, dynamic point 
of view, we can always observe a complex interchange of many fac-
tors determining the individual picture of ADHD. Nevertheless, in 
the following subgroups, some of these factors seemed to dominate 
and were thus picked out in order to characterize the specific sub-
group. All the examples (except example 1) illustrating the subgroup 
are taken from our sample in the Frankfurt Prevention Study . (As an 
illustration of VII ‘Growing up with a depressed primary object’, 
we will refer to the summary of the child analysis with Nora in the 
paper of Marianne Leuzinger-Bohleber in this volume.)
I Children with a brain organic problem
Michael, a 5-year-old only child, is the ‘enfant terrible’ of his kinder-
garten: he is involved in constant aggressive conflicts and absorbs 
his teachers for more or less the whole day. If they do not keep him 
under observation, the probability is high that he will hurt himself 
or another child:
Often he does not intend to do so—but Michael is clumsy. He 
seems not to be able to perceive and evaluate situations ade-
quately. He is throwing things at other kids, destroys their toys 
and drawings or, as happened last Wednesday, he once more 
fell off the climbing frame in the garden and had to be brought 
to the doctor.
(Mrs M.)
His teachers agreed that Michael did not have any problems if he 
was alone with one of them in a dyadic situation, for example, when 
he was playing in the room with one member of staff:
In such a situation he is able to concentrate and to sit still for at 
least 10 minutes. He is a nice and cute little boy when you have 
him alone. In contrast, he is terrible in a group situation. He 
constantly seems to be overwhelmed with stimuli. During the 
morning hours, he becomes more and more clumsy, restless and 

CONTROVERSIES ON DIFFERENT APPROACHES   2 3
aggressive. Our institution can hardly deal with him anymore. 
We have to take care of another 18 kids in his group.
(Teacher A)
In the psychological assessment, Michael’s mother talked about the 
difficult, even traumatic, birth of Michael. He probably suffered 
from a lack of oxygen. He had a low Apgar asphyxia index and 
already showed severe eating and sleeping disturbances in the first 
months of his life. After the medical examinations U2, U3, and U4 
(regularly carried out in Germany at X months by paediatricians, 
the results of which are documented in a special file for each child), 
the doctor told the parents that they should arrange a neurological 
assessment for Michael to test if an early intervention programme 
should be initiated to overcome Michael’s retarded sensory motor 
development. The parents did not follow this advice. During the 
assessment interview, the mother said: ‘My husband had exactly 
the same problems when he was a baby—he was a clumsy, crying 
infant—these are problems of his family. Michael will grow out of 
them and overcome them without extra help.’ Only when her hus-
band died suddenly six months later from a heart attack did she 
change her mind and became willing to accept therapeutic help for 
herself and Michael.
Looking back on the one year of psychoanalytic therapy with 
Michael (twice a week), it seemed most likely to me (M.L.-B.) that 
an organic component played an important role in Michael’s ADHD 
symptoms, although he had never undergone detailed neurologi-
cal testing (functional magnetic resonance imaging [FMRI], and 
so forth). However, in psychological tests, some indicators sup-
porting this hypothesis could be found. In the HAWIK (Hamburg 
Wechsler Intelligence Test) he had a score of 102. In the Göttinger 
Formrepreoduktions-Test, a test which compares children with a 
diagnosed brain organic problem with two samples, one of ‘normal’ 
children and one of children with probable organic brain pathology, 
Michael´s probability score was 42. This means that he had a score at 
the 42nd percentile of children with an organic brain disorder; 58% 
of this group would achieve better results.
One major focus of the psychoanalytic therapy was to under-
stand unconscious fantasies in the context of the traumatic loss of 

24  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
the father in the midst of Michael’s oedipal developmental phase. 
His enormous guilt feelings and his ‘magic conviction’ that he had 
caused the death of his father could finally be understood and 
worked through in therapy. Michael had very low self-esteem, think-
ing that he was ‘an ugly, uncontrollable, destructive monster’. This 
self-representation was partially due to his ADHD problems. He 
seemed to realize that he was different from the other kids. ‘I can-
not control my body and often just do things and hurt others with-
out really wanting to’ he said during a session. In this context, it 
was important for him that I tried to explain to him possible early 
roots of his problems according to the well-known consequences of 
‘so-called minimal brain dysfunction’, as it had been discussed in 
Europe at that time (see the historical overview above). I told him:
You are not a ‘monster’, as you fear … you just have gone 
through some very special problems as a baby. Your body has 
not forgotten these experiences and still has more problems 
than those of other children to control some situations … We 
will try to understand together what your body wants to tell 
you. Afterwards you will better be able to control your body, 
thoughts and feelings.
I cannot go into any details of the therapeutic process here but only 
want to mention that it also seemed essential that I worked with 
Michael’s mother, too. I tried to help her to understand Michael’s 
behaviour better in order to deal with him in a more adequate way 
(she was also in psychotherapy trying to overcome the traumatic 
loss of her husband and her resentful feeling ‘that he has left me 
alone with this difficult child …’8). The teachers of the kindergarten 
also helped the mother to structure the day for Michael in the sense 
of supporting or even compensating for his partially underdevel-
oped ego functions, trying to overcome his difficulties in control-
ling and regulating his affects and needs (clear daily structure with 
regular changes between concentration and relaxation phases for 
Michael, protection from being flooded with stimuli in group situa-
tions, TV consumption, undergoing psychomotor training, playing 
tennis, and so forth).
This combination of psychoanalytic therapy and counselling 
of the mother enabled Michael to start normal elementary school 

CONTROVERSIES ON DIFFERENT APPROACHES   2 5
successfully and to ‘develop in a normal way, intellectually and 
socially—for example, in respect of my friends and my girlfriend’, 
as he said in a follow-up interview as an 18-year-old adolescent.
Nowadays, perhaps medication would be advised in a case such 
as Michael’s. From a psychoanalytic perspective, it was impressive 
how Michael, as an 18-year-old adolescent, talked about his own 
achievements: ‘I am proud that I made my way despite the early 
death of my father and my brain problems due to my birth.’ To 
achieve these developments without the help of medication seemed 
to be essential for his self-esteem.
Stuart Hauser and his co-workers (2006) published a similar case: 
Pete, a boy who also had an ADHD diagnosis and severe behavioural 
problems during latency and early adolescence. The astonishing resil-
ience of this boy is considered by these authors to be mainly connected 
with his capability of seeing his own contribution to his conduct prob-
lems in childhood and adolescence (see the Preface to this volume). 
Psychoanalytic therapies work on insights on precisely this topic and 
thus probably contribute to the resilience of children with ADHD.
II Children with early emotional neglect
Robert, a 5-year-old boy is—like Michael—hardly tolerable for 
his kindergarten. Due to his aggressive and destructive behaviour 
he is socially isolated, has not one single friend and usually plays 
alone. He is unable to concentrate for more than five minutes and 
seems to suffer from enormous anxieties. He is in constant motion 
and cannot sit still; one teacher characterized him as a ‘a classical 
fidgeter—not one single meal passes without him making a mess 
somehow …’
Robert is the only son of an unemployed, 21-year-old, woman, 
Mrs X, who has a severe alcohol problem. Robert’s father left his 
mother after a short and dramatic relationship before Robert was 
even born. The mother resents psychologists because, as she says, she 
was diagnosed as ‘manic-depressive’ by a psychiatrist who hospital-
ized her for several months. Mrs X tells the psychologist (Gerlinde 
Goeppel, a member of our research team) that she has broken off 
contact with her parents because ‘both of them are alcoholics and 
maltreated me terribly as a child’. She now lives on social welfare, 
is socially isolated, and in danger of becoming an alcoholic. Robert 

26  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
though, she says, ‘is all I have—the only thing that makes sense of 
my life …’ After several talks with Gerlinde Goeppel, she is willing 
to accept psychological help, but after the kindergarten’s summer 
break she does not return: she has moved away.
Our team, as well as the kindergarten teachers, were very 
concerned about the situation and Robert’s future. He belonged 
to the group of 40 children who, in our view, would have needed 
psychotherapeutic help urgently but for whom the parents did not 
accept professional support. Robert’s ADHD symptoms seemed to 
be connected to severe emotional neglect. His early object relations 
probably did not enable him to develop a secure attachment or a 
stable inner affect regulation.
In contrast, the parents of 17 children coming from a similar social 
background accepted help for their ADHD child because we could 
offer them that therapy in the kindergartens (the therapists were 
available to treat these children twice a week in special rooms at 
the kindergartens). One of the most impressive child therapies was 
reported extensively by Christina Waldung (Waldung et al., 2006). 
We summarize some of her findings here. Peter (5 years old) is also 
a child who suffered from severe early emotional neglect and who 
developed ADHD symptoms.
In supervision with me (L-B), a teacher reported furiously 
that Peter had spat in her face. ‘This is beyond the acceptable—I 
don’t want to have him in my group anymore—I’ve tried so 
hard with him—and now this—I will not tolerate this—I am so 
disappointed …’ I suggested in the supervision: ‘Of course I don’t 
want to excuse his behaviour, but perhaps Peter wanted to tell you 
something and has chosen you as his most beloved person in the 
kindergarten as the one to spit at. Let’s try to understand his behav-
iour first and then talk about how to deal with it …’
After this intervention, another teacher of the supervision group 
remembers that the female cook recalled that Peter, who had been 
sent away, came to the kitchen and said: ‘You know, sometimes 
I just do not want to live anymore …’ We take his message very seri-
ously. The headteacher of the kindergarten called Peter’s father and 
discovered that Mr E had just lost his job as a taxi driver because of 
his diabetes. The mother is severely mentally ill and had repeatedly 
left the family. Mr E had tried to keep the family together, being 
20 years older than his wife and more stable than her. Two older 

CONTROVERSIES ON DIFFERENT APPROACHES   2 7
children had been taken into a children’s home soon after starting 
school. Both of them had had severe conduct problems and were 
diagnosed with ADHD. In supervision, we ultimately understood 
that Peter tried to unconsciously communicate his despair to his 
most beloved teacher. He probably feared that his family situation 
would now definitely collapse and that he would be taken away 
to a children’s home like his two siblings. I (L-B) tried to explain 
in supervision: ‘If you have such an unbearable expectation as a 
child—it is well known that these children try to actively provoke 
something in order that they, at least, can have the fantasy that it 
was themselves who are responsible for the “punishment” instead 
of just being the passive, helpless victim …’ Fortunately, the father 
finally accepted psychoanalytic therapy for Peter. Peter has been 
in therapy for nearly three years and was able to be successful in 
normal elementary school. The therapist also worked intensively 
with both parents. The mother was sent to a mental hospital after 
Peter’s birth for several months. She is in constant treatment by a 
psychiatrist but often does not take her pills. She has left the fam-
ily again and again and had several affairs. Mr E, who once lost a 
former wife, which was a traumatic experience for him, fights to 
keep the family together and does not want ‘to lose his last child’. 
The regular contact with the therapist helped him to overcome his 
depression due to his unemployment and to realize how important 
his fatherly role is in bringing up Peter.
Peter is a highly intelligent boy. At the beginning of therapy he 
was absorbed by the fantasy that if he were a girl he would not have 
the ADHD difficulties and ‘my mother would love me more …’ He 
already showed transvestite symptoms, wanted to be a girl, and 
hated typical rough-and-tumble games. After these fantasies had 
been understood and worked through in therapy, the transves-
tite symptoms disappeared: he now seems to show ‘normal male 
development’. Another infantile fantasy was that he had to save the 
marriage of his parents by lying between them in the marital bed 
whenever the mother returned to the father’s home. Only after hav-
ing understood the wishes and fears underlying these fantasies was 
he able to accept his own room and sleep alone.
Of course, he still has conduct problems at school. His mother 
was hospitalized again shortly after Peter began school. Because 
she was put under medication again, she suddenly wanted to have 

28  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
medication (Ritalin®) for Peter, too. Fortunately, we cooperated well 
with the University Clinic for Child and Adolescent Psychiatry  to 
whom Peter was referred. Therefore, we could prevent the child 
therapy from being terminated. The psychiatrist convinced the par-
ents that Peter does not need Ritalin® but does require a continua-
tion of his psychotherapy.
For a long time the therapy focused on Peter’s sudden aggres-
sive outbursts, which had been a serious problem at school. These 
outbursts were often triggered by feelings of impotence and help-
lessness, which Peter could not stand, probably because they uncon-
sciously reminded him of his early traumatic experiences with his 
primary objects.
Now (2009): more than two years after the termination of the psy-
chotherapy Peter is able to concentrate in class. He is better socially 
integrated and no longer so hyperactive. Peter and his parents still 
have a long way to go, but we are convinced that the psychoanalytic 
therapy helped to strengthen the boy’s resilience.
All the children in Peter’s family were diagnosed with ADHD. 
Peter’s development may illustrate that even if there should be a 
genetic component, psychotherapy could still help to change the 
ADHD symptoms by understanding the traumatic early relation-
ships (for the theoretical considerations, see above).
III ADHD and trauma
Johi, 4½ years old, is called ‘the little professor’ by his peers in kin-
dergarten because he often seems to be absent-minded, daydream-
ing, and unable to concentrate on anything. Sometimes he is also 
involved in aggressive conflicts with other children because he sud-
denly interrupts their play and disturbs them. He is hardly able to 
sit still—he seems in constant motor tension:
He is a nice and lovely little boy but does not seem to be able 
to take into account any rules or agreements. Often I have the 
feeling that he just does not understand what I am telling him. 
Sometimes he forgets to take off his jacket and seems very sur-
prised when I tell him that he still has his jacket on …
(Teacher B)

CONTROVERSIES ON DIFFERENT APPROACHES   2 9
Several teachers reported in supervision that Johi was already able 
to read when he entered kindergarten aged 3½ years. His parents, 
intellectuals from an African country, had to flee under dramatic 
circumstances when Johi was 1 year old. They are convinced that 
Johi is exceptionally intellectually gifted and thought about send-
ing him to a kindergarten for highly talented children. Only when 
the teachers told them about Johi’s serious social problems did 
they stop pursuing the question of his intelligence. They declined 
the offer of having Johi’s intelligence tested and for Johi’s difficul-
ties to be talked over with the Study psychologist. It may be that 
Johi is severely absorbed by the ‘secrets’ in his family due to their 
massive traumatization (the family lost several members in the civil 
war; the father was in prison; the mother probably a victim of sexual 
violence). Therefore, we have the hypothesis that the early capac-
ity to read could also have compensatory functions: an unconscious 
attempt to cope with the trauma. His daydreaming and his dissocia-
tive state could also be seen in this context.
Johi was not the only child with ADHD symptoms who came 
from a severely traumatized refugee family. In some kindergartens 
in Frankfurt there are many children from families who fled from 
their countries. Often the kindergarten team knows little about the 
traumatic family history. In the supervisions we sometimes encour-
aged the teachers to try to talk with these families, because in some 
cases the kindergarten seems to be the only ‘social meeting place’ 
for these families. In some cases it was possible to initiate child or 
family therapies for these children or to refer them to a counselling 
centre for refugees in Frankfurt.9
IV ADHD and culture
Ahib, 5 years old, is the third son of a Pakistani family. In a sud-
den outburst of rage he kicked the stomach of a 4-year-old girl so 
violently that she had to be taken into hospital. The teachers com-
mented in a resigned way:
We have no idea what else we can do, we have tried everything—
all three brothers had been extremely aggressive, hyperactive, 
and weak in their achievements … but the parents stuck to their 
opinion that their sons do not have any problems at home and 

30  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
are highly talented. They came to Germany so that all of them 
should become medical doctors … We can only wait until the 
school reacts and sends them to a special school for children 
with low intelligence and conduct problems. Ahib is already 
hardly tolerable in our institution. Since his little sister was born 
he particularly often attacks little girls … Nearly every day we 
have difficulties with him …
(Teacher D)
Ahib’s family comes from an Eastern country with a culture widely 
unknown to the teachers. According to the reports of the mother, the 
children in her native village mostly grow up in the streets. The boys 
in particular have to learn to assert themselves in their peer group. 
‘They have to learn to fight in order to survive …’ This cultural back-
ground as well as the problems with language (they hardly speak 
German) may contribute to the conduct problems of these boys. All 
of them could be diagnosed as suffering from ADHD.
Frankfurt, as many other cities in Western Europe, has become a 
multicultural city. To mention just one example, in one kindergarten 
with 103 children only three had a German passport. Twenty-seven 
different nations with many, many different cultures and languages 
were represented in this institution. What a challenge for teachers 
working in such a kindergarten!10 To diagnose many of these chil-
dren as suffering from ADHD and to treat them with medication 
would suggest denial of one of the most urgent problems in our 
Western society: the need for social integration and the prevention 
of so-called ‘parallel societies’.
V ADHD and extraordinarily talented children
Five-year-old Dominik became more and more problematic in his 
kindergarten due to a change of teaching policy introduced 1½ years 
ago by a new director. The new director introduced a more hierarchi-
cal, relatively rigid, educational model, with closed groups of chil-
dren and a more or less structured schedule. ‘The children should 
be educated in a more strict and direct way,’ the director explained 
to the parents. ‘We offer opportunities to learn English, French, and 
Maths regularly—each day from 10 to 11. Therefore, all the children 

CONTROVERSIES ON DIFFERENT APPROACHES   3 1
have to be in kindergarten at 9 o’clock.’ Dominik, coming from an 
intellectual background with very creative parents, just hated these 
changes and complained that he did not want to go to kindergarten 
anymore but preferred to stay at home ‘because I want to play and 
do my own things …’ In kindergarten, he got involved more and 
more in aggressive conflicts, was rebellious in the lessons he had to 
attend, did not concentrate and was not able to sit still. Finally, the 
teachers recommended having him assessed for ADHD.
The tests showed that Dominik was extraordinarily talented with 
an IQ of about 132 (Kramer Intelligence Test). He understood French 
fluently and was already able to read in his fifth year of life. He also 
had an extraordinary level of skill in mathematical problem-solving. 
He surprised the psychologist by his vivid fantasy and creativity. 
He loved to draw but also to invent stories with Lego® and so on. 
When the psychologist asked him why he did not want to attend 
the English and Maths lessons in kindergarten, he said: ‘It is just 
boring—I hate it—I want to do my own things.’ After discussing 
the results of the psychological testing, the parents decided to take 
Dominik to another kindergarten with more open space in the edu-
cational agenda. Dominik liked to go there, played for hours with 
another very talented and creative child and lost all of his ADHD 
symptoms.
Dominik is one example of a child who may be diagnosed with 
ADHD but who is actually highly talented and responding to an 
environment ill-suited to accommodate this. They develop concen-
tration problems and aggressive behaviour because they are forced 
into educational programmes which seem ‘just boring’ to them. 
ADHD may be—in these rare cases—seen as a manifestation of an 
unconscious protest against a denial of the idiosyncratic intellectual 
or emotional capacities of these children. Therefore, one should also, 
when diagnosing ADHD, consider the problems of such children 
in the context and atmosphere of their educational institutions and 
teachers.
VI ADHD and mourning or depression
Rahel, a 5-year-old girl, is not able to concentrate. She often sits in 
a corner in her group of children, sad and withdrawn. She seems to 
be in another world. Sometimes these withdrawals suddenly turn 

32  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
into aggressive and hyperactive behaviour (one reason why she also 
belongs to the group of ADHD children according to the criteria of 
our study). ‘In such states she seems to be without any centre in 
herself, in constant tension and movement and looking for conflicts 
and aggressive interactions with other kids’ (Teacher C).
Rahel had been a ‘normal child’ until, a year previously, her mother 
was diagnosed with lung cancer. She had to undergo radiotherapy 
and chemotherapy, without success. She died 6 months ago.
In supervision we discussed the hypothesis that the ADHD 
symptoms of Rahel could be seen as a kind of manic defence 
against unbearable feelings of despair, anxiety, and mourning. 
It turned out that Rahel’s father had already lost his first wife 
because of cancer. She left him with two children, who are now 
16 and 18 years of age. Rahel has a younger brother of 3 years. In 
supervision, the teachers report that she sometimes draws herself 
as her little brother’s substitute mother, an indication of her iden-
tification with the dead mother. Her destructive and aggressive 
behaviour could also be connected to unconscious guilt feelings 
and fantasies that her oedipal strivings could have been one reason 
for her mother’s death.
After several months and several consultations with the teachers 
of the kindergarten, Rahel’s father was willing to accept psychoana-
lytic help for his family and for Rahel. Rahel is now in psychoana-
lytic treatment with an experienced colleague. Her ADHD symptoms 
have already decreased in the past four months since she started 
treatment.
This may seem like an exceptional example, although we would 
like to mention that Rahel was not the only child in the sample of 
the Frankfurt Prevention Study  who developed ADHD symptoms 
after an unbearable life event. Sometimes the supervisors had to 
prompt the kindergarten teachers to ask the parents straight away 
what had happened in the family in order to understand a sudden 
change in the behaviour of a certain child. In some cases, the par-
ents tried to hide the severe events, particularly if they were con-
nected with the break-up of their marriages or similar (potentially 
shaming) events.
In the context of this paper we can only offer short summaries 
of these fully documented clinical cases of the Frankfurt Prevention 
Study . However, we hope that they have illustrated one of the major 

CONTROVERSIES ON DIFFERENT APPROACHES   3 3
theses of this volume: ADHD is not a unitary condition, but has to be 
understood as the (symptomatic) product of an idiosyncratic com-
plex intertwining of many factors and determinants.
6 Clinical, conceptual, and empirical psychoanalytic 
research on ADHD and other disturbances of early 
development: Overview on the contributions 
of this volume
As may be clear, we are convinced that interdisciplinary dialogue 
between psychoanalysts and other psychotherapists, child psychia-
trists, brain researchers, educational, and social scientists and also 
between parents, teachers, and other professionals is absolutely 
necessary to deepen our understanding for possible origins, preven-
tions, and interventions, helping children suffering from so-called 
‘attention deficit hyperactivity disorder’ (ADHD), and related 
developmental disturbances. In this volume you will find papers 
illustrating this dialogue.
In Part II  of this book papers from non-psychoanalytical as well as from 
psychoanalytic research  are included: Two of the leading child psychi-
atrists in Germany, Gerd Lehmkuhl (Cologne) and Annette Streek-
Fischer (Göttingen),11 as well as one of the leading researchers on 
temperament, William Carey from Philadelphia (Discussant: Jorge 
Canestri, Rome) are contributing to this volume. Gerd Lehmkuhl 
discusses the dialogue between child psychatrist and child psycho-
analysts and summarizes:
What are the conclusion and the overall perspective? Child psy-
chiatrists ought to ask themselves how neuroscientific results can 
represent the inner world of their patients, which methods can bet-
ter detect the experiences, feelings and self-concepts and how early 
attachment experiences can effect the cognitive and emotional devel-
opment. And child psychoanalysts? They should be inspired by the 
versatile and complex developmental models in order to reassess 
the importance of the environment for intrapsychic processes.
If mentalization disorders can be caused not only by negative 
attachment experiences, but also by biological processes, this 
has an important effect on treatment procedures, especially 
regarding the work with parents.

34  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
Moreover, many factors suggest that mentalization and 
autobiographical memory are not completed at a certain point 
of time, but are part of a long-some course of development hav-
ing consequences for treatment planning.
(This volume)
In his paper, William Carey takes into consideration another element; 
he emphasizes as the main focus of his thesis that: ‘the current neglect 
of normal temperament differences has resulted in an overdiagno-
sis of CNS-based psychopathology and an overuse of medication’. 
This situation, which appears to be extremely worrying in the USA 
according to the data provided by the author, is unfortunately not 
very different in Europe. The author rightly reminds us that there are 
temperamental differences in children. (The term ‘temperament’ is 
not common in psychoanalysis, but the concept can be easily traced. 
Carey defines temperament as ‘the characteristic way with which 
the child experiences and responds to environmental stimuli’.)
In his discussion, Jorge Canestri mentions how Carey’s obser-
vation of early 20th-century psychology, in contrast with that of 
previous centuries, emphasized the dominant importance of the 
environment, with a few exceptions, among them that of Freud, 
who wrote in Analysis terminable and interminable  (1937): ‘each indi-
vidual ego is endowed from the beginning with its own peculiar 
dispositions and tendencies’. The author of Coping with children’s 
temperament  attributes to the ‘general professional and public unfa-
miliarity with our growing knowledge about normal temperament 
differences’ an important responsibility for producing this state of 
affairs.
The discussant, Jorge Canestri, underlines that a great deal of 
contemporary psychoanalysis, by excessively accentuating the effect 
of the environment and not acknowledging what Freud attributed 
to ‘nature’, is no less responsible. The match therefore seems to be 
between a so-called ‘organic’ type of psychiatry that is blind to the 
relationship between natural gifts and environment, and a psychoa-
nalysis that, by neglecting the Freudian concept of complementary 
series, ends up by never including X in its equations, X being one 
of the firm assumptions of the father of psychoanalysis. For a long 
time it appeared that X—that is, the inborn factors, dispositions, and 
tendencies—were not known and it was therefore useless to include 

CONTROVERSIES ON DIFFERENT APPROACHES   3 5
them. Today it is not possible, or advisable, to continue along this 
line, especially when we see the effects that this positioning of ‘org-
anicism’ against ‘environmentalism’ can provoke.
In Part II  we have also included some clinical papers, in spite of 
the well-known criticism of clinical research in psychoanalysis  as well 
as the tradition of case histories  in psychoanalysis, criticism increasing 
within the zeitgeist of evidence-based medicine. In spite of all these 
objections, Adelheid Staufenberg, Luisa Busch de Ahumada, Jorge 
L. Ahumada, Marianne Leuzinger-Bohleber, Annette Streek Fischer, 
and Angela Joyce take up this tradition in their papers. They do 
not pretend to present ‘conclusive, objective findings’, but rather to 
communicate complex and detailed clinical observations and some 
conceptualizations based on them. We are convinced that some of 
these observations can only be told and not measured . Most of the find-
ings and insights of psychoanalysis are based on this kind of natu-
ralistic, observational ‘field research’, the often years-long clinical 
work with our patients.
The tradition of communicating these findings by narratives is 
meeting with a new interest in contemporary educational fields and 
social sciences, and even in some fields of the neurosciences and 
Embodied Cognitive Science within academic psychology. In con-
trast to the presentation of results of empirical studies, we are often 
inspired by arts and literature while writing narratives, fields which 
remind us that in human communication there is no such thing as 
a single ‘objective truth’. What we see and understand in a com-
plex human interaction could be compared with carefully looking 
through a kaleidoscope—the patterns which we discover in com-
plex clinical data often depend very much on the (unconscious) 
focus we choose. Again and again we recognize different infor-
mation structures in complex phenomena. Of course, as Charles 
Hanly elaborates in his paper in Part III , the interpretations of our 
observations should not be contradictory but rather should sup-
plement each other, looking at the same information from different 
perspectives and being prepared to falsify some of our hypotheses 
after precise multi-perspective observations. This is one of the spe-
cificities of our science (‘Wissenschaft’) which we have to explain 
in an assertive way in interdisciplinary discourse. On the other 
hand, as, for example, Horst Kächele (2008) has often reminded 
us, this specificity should never become an ‘excuse’ not to open up 

36  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
our research field to the observation, the understanding, and the 
critical perspectives of non-psychoanalytic scientists, particularly if 
they engage with the detailed clinical observations of the results of 
our psychoanalytic treatments, for example, with ADHD children. 
Therefore—thanks to the collaboration with the departments of Fritz 
Poustka (Frankfurt) and Emil Branik (Hamburg)—the research team 
at the Sigmund-Freud-Institut is now able to conduct an empirical 
comparative outcome study on psychoanalytic therapies (group I), 
behavioural/pharmacological (group II), and ‘normal’ (pharmocological) 
psychiatric treatments of hyperactive children (group III)  (see www.
sigmund-freud-institut.de and Laezer et al., 2010; Laezer, in prep).
As will be discussed in Part II  and Part III  of this volume, psycho-
analytic researchers always have to cope with a specific tension: on 
the one hand we have to argue that our specific research topic, 
unconscious fantasies and conflicts, are not directly observable and 
thus need the very specific research methodology of psychoanalysis, 
using the precise observation and understanding  of free associations, 
dreams, slips of the tongue, and so forth, as well as of transference 
and counter-transference reactions in the psychoanalytic sessions. 
Psychoanalysis has also developed specific criteria of ‘truth’ in 
order to evaluate certain hypotheses or falsify others—in close 
cooperation with our analysts within the psychoanalytic setting. 
This genuine psychoanalytic form of research cannot be replaced by 
any other form of research, but only supplemented, a point which 
Björn Salomonsson takes up in his discussion of Peter Fonagy´s 
paper. The results of clinical research can often only be communi-
cated by narratives. On the other hand, psychoanalytic researchers 
are confronted with the requirements of scientific communication 
such as the need for transparency of data and of the different steps 
of interpretations based on these observations, the falsifiability of 
hypotheses, the accessibility to criticism from the outside, the sys-
tematic control of subjective factors, and so forth.
As our Research Sub-committee has discussed in a recent paper 
(Leuzinger-Bohleber and Fischmann, 2006), innovative research in 
the field of conceptual research depends on its capacity to integrate 
a rich spectrum of clinical and conceptual knowledge as well as the 
current state of the findings of interdisciplinary studies relevant to 
the specific concept. Psychoanalytic concepts have to prove to be 
‘externally coherent’ (Strenger) with this interdisciplinary state of 

CONTROVERSIES ON DIFFERENT APPROACHES   3 7
the art. This is a challenge as well as an enormous opportunity. We 
will mention just one example from the contemporary dialogue 
between psychoanalysis and the neurosciences.
Bradley Peterson discussed one of the most basic questions of 
psychoanalytic developmental research in his contribution at the 
Joseph Sandler Conference:12 the question of the chicken and the 
egg. Do ADHD children suffer from a genetically determined defect 
in the neurotransmitter regulation in their brains? Or are the find-
ings of some deviations in brain functioning themselves the results 
of early and the earliest interactions with the environment (start-
ing during pregnancy) as, for example, Jaak Panksepp postulates? 
Precisely these questions are also intensively debated in the field of 
Embodied Cognitive Science (see, for example, Pfeifer and Bongard, 
2007) and in the discourse on neural plasticity (see for example, 
Doidge, 2007). It is extremely interesting also to look at some of the 
neurobiological studies. Let us take one example.
Mirescu, Peter, and Gould (2004) published a study, ‘Early life 
experience alters responses of adult neurogenesis to stress’ in Nature 
Neuroscience . They report that the separation of baby rats from their 
mothers directly after birth has severe long-term effects on their 
behaviour and neuroendocrinological circuits. These rats become 
more anxious, more sensitive to stress, react in a more aggressive 
way, and are limited in their exploration and learning behaviour. 
Analogously, could these findings hint at possible long-term effects 
of early traumatization in ADHD children as well? At any rate, the 
results of this study support the insights of the classical hospitali-
zation studies of René Spitz as well as other studies on the effects 
of early separation by Bowlby, the Robertsons and others (see also 
Leuzinger-Bohleber, Roth, and Buchheim, 2008; Suomi, 2010). To 
integrate these interdisciplinary findings into our psychoanalytical 
concepts of early development and its disturbances seems to be a 
fascinating and promising task for future research.
Peter Fonagy’s paper illustrates the fact that such integrations are 
not only a vision for the future. He combines knowledge from his 
clinical experiences with severely traumatized children with empiri-
cal findings from different fields such as attachment research and 
neurobiological brain research, and integrates all of these insights 
into fascinating conceptualizations on the influence of early devel-
opment and its disturbances.

38  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
Although the relationship between clinical, conceptual, empirical, 
and interdisciplinary research is touched on in Part II  of this volume, 
taking the example of ADHD as just mentioned, we will go into this 
issue on a more general level in Part III , and Charles Hanly, Jorge L. 
Ahumada, and Doria Medina will raise some of the sophisticated 
epistemological problems connected to these debates. Anna Ursula 
Dreher and Ilse Grubrich-Simitis will deepen the aforementioned 
aims, characteristics, and specifics of conceptual research in 
psychoanalysis.
We want to conclude this introduction  by stressing the follow-
ing points: a psychoanalytic perspective on ADHD focuses on 
the different underlying structures of the personality due to the 
idiosyncratic life history of a child with its early internal object 
relations, traumatizations, ego- and self-development and its spe-
cific limitations, as well as former and current external object rela-
tions. Our diagnostic and clinical experiences reveal a wide range 
of structural and object-relational levels in such children: there is 
no monocausal aetiology . ADHD children often might have shown 
a genetically based over-reactivity and hypersensitivity to various 
stimuli as infants, which the caregivers were not able to under-
stand. The infant’s consequent failure to regulate drive impulses 
and affects results in a disruption of what Bürgin (2005) called the 
‘narrative function’, depleting the ego of the secondary-process 
functions underlying a sense of coherence of the self. We think that 
children of one subgroup of ADHD share such early ‘mismatched’ 
object relations combined with insecurity in attachment, causing 
vulnerability to flooding with stimuli and stress (see Panksepp, 
1998; Hüther, 2006). Following this line of thought, these early 
experiences in object relations have left deficiencies concerning 
attention,  seen as a highly complex ego function which develops 
in a specific relational context, and is influenced by genetic factors, 
early emotional exchanges, temperament, micro traumata, and so 
forth (see also Sugarman, 2006: 238). Attention regulation is in turn 
one of a set of related fundamental ego capacities also including 
affect regulation and mentalization (social cognition); a weakness 
in any of these would be expected to undermine the strength of 
the others.
Another perspective on the failure of developing early regula-
tion and control was elaborated by Panksepp (1998): particularly for 

CONTROVERSIES ON DIFFERENT APPROACHES   3 9
children born with a (probably genetically determined) impulsive 
temper and character, the opportunity to engage in active explora-
tion of their environment and in rough-and tumble-games seems to 
be essential in order to develop frontal lobe executive functions. If 
they do not find ‘good enough’ environmental conditions for such 
games and exploration then they may develop ADHD.
There is separate evidence that medical treatment might have 
a shadowy side, restricting the neuroplastic compensations of the 
brain of ADHD children, as well as perhaps restricting growth 
overall. A first careful study by Randa et al.  (2005: 284) showed in a 
‘population composed of twelve children treated with therapeutic 
doses of methylphenidate’ that in ‘all participants treatment induced 
a significant … increase of chromosome aberrations, sister chromatic 
exchanges and micronuclei frequencies respectively (P = 0.000 in all 
cases). These findings warrant further investigations of the possi-
ble health effects of methylphenidate in humans, especially in view 
of the well-documented relationship between elevated frequencies 
of chromosome aberrations and increased cancer risk.’ (See also 
Seeman and Machias, 1998.)
In our view, medication should only be given after a careful neu-
rological, psychiatric, and psychological investigation. It should 
be reserved for children in whom no psychotherapeutic or peda-
gogic intervention seems to be available or shows signs of being 
successful. This caution is consistent with many psychiatric, neu-
rological, and psychoanalytical authors who warn of early medical 
interference with the growing brain. On the other side of course 
is the hope that pharmacological regulation of a neurochemical 
abnormality would allow more normal growth of brain and psy-
chological capacity. Independent studies on the long-term effects of 
medication are urgently needed, and in the meantime great caution 
is appropriate.
Of course, much more clinical and empirical research is needed 
on all aspects of this serious spectrum of disorders. Neverthe-
less, given the current ‘state of the art’, we reach the following 
conclusion: taking into account neurobiological, (unconscious) 
biographical as well as societal factors, we are convinced that 
contemporary psychoanalysis—due to its richness of con-
ceptualization and clinical experience—offers a unique win-
dow on the complexities of ADHD. Besides, more than other 

40  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
psychotherapeutic approaches, psychoanalysts offer suitable 
‘corrective’ experiences in the therapeutic relationship with these 
children and thus the possibility to ‘correct’ or at least to soften 
failed early development. Thus, psychoanalytic treatment should 
be considered one of the promising therapeutic choices  for treating 
children with ADHD.
We hope to illustrate this thesis with the different contributions 
in this volume.
Notes
 1. A. Staufenberg (in print) showed in a systematic literature review 
that hardly any psychoanalytic papers on ADHD could be found 
before 2000 in German-speaking psychoanalytical journals.
 2. The study was supported financially mainly by the Zinnkan Foun-
dation, but also by the Research Advisory Board (RAB) of the Inter-
national Psychoanalytical Association, the Hertie Foundation, and 
the Polytechnische Gesellschaft, Frankfurt.
 3. André Green (1999) talks about the ‘dead mother’ in a particular 
context. In his own biography his mother suddenly became depressed 
after a family tragedy. For him, in his second year of life, this was like 
losing her: she was ‘emotionally dead’ for him, not capable any more 
of participating in lively, affective, and resonant dialogue with him. 
 4. We do not aim to give a complete overview of the current litera-
ture on ADHD. A Google search for ADHD currently finds around 
740,000 hits and many panels and blogs on this topic. We will con-
centrate on a small selection of the studies and literature avail-
able. At the University of Kassel Dr. Luise Laezer and a group of 
students have installed an elctronic documentation data bank for 
ADHD literature (see http://h1322887.stratoserver.net/login.php). 
We also should mention the ‘European Network on Hyperkinetic 
Disorder’ (EUNETHYDIS) founded in 1990 as well as the different 
‘Leitlinien ADHS’ (medical guidelines for treating ADHD children) 
in Germany. Similar clinical guidelines exist in other countries.
 5. In the 1980s ‘Minimal Cerebral Dysfunction’ (MCD) was wide-
spread (see Mattner, 2006). It was seen as being closely con-
nected with oppositional defiant disorder. This connection could 
already be observed in the 1950s. At that time, German authors 
discussed ‘ Encephalopathische Psychopathie ’ (encephalopathic 
psychopathology), ‘ Hirnorganisch-psychisches Achsensyndrom ’ (brain-
organic axis syndrome) and ‘ Frühkindliches exogenes Psychosyndrom ’ 

CONTROVERSIES ON DIFFERENT APPROACHES   4 1
(infantile exogene psychosyndrome). In Switzerland one used the 
term ‘ Frühkindliches Psycho-organisches Syndrom ’ (POS) (infantile 
psycho-organic syndrome) (Ruf-Bächtinger, 1987). Berger (1977) 
talked about ‘ Teilleistungsstörungen ’ (partial disturbances of function-
ings) or ‘ Teilleistungsschwächen ’ (partial weakness infunctioning).
 6. Rothstein (2002: 392) summarizes the diagnostic criteria briefly 
as follows: ‘According to DSM-IV criteria, “Attention Deficit/
Hyperactivity Disorder” (AD/HD) is diagnosed if four conditions 
are met. One is either a persistent pattern of inattention or hyperactivity-
impulsivity  more frequent than is typical for the patient’s age. A sec-
ond is that some of the symptoms must have been present before the age of 
seven . Third, the symptoms must be observed in at least two settings , such 
as at home and at school or work. Finally, clear evidence is required 
of compromised social, academic, or occupational functioning .’
   There have been basic critiques concerning the descriptive clas-
sification manuals as DSM–IV , one reason why Mayes and Howitz 
(2005) published an alternative Psychodynamic Diagnostic Manual  
(PDM). The information contained in the PSM was collected by a 
collaborative task force which included members of the American 
Psychoanalytic Association, the Division of Psychoanalysis (Division 
39) of the American Psychological Association, the American Acad-
emy of Psychoanalysis and Dynamic Psychiatry, and the National 
Membership Committee on Psychoanalysis in Clinical Social Work. 
Unfortunately PSM is not very well known in Europe and could not 
prevent the contribution of DSM-IV and ICD-10 to a marginaliza-
tion of psychoanalysis in psychiatry. The field of ADHD is just one 
example of this marginalization (see also McWilliam, 2009). 
 7. An exception is the study by Randa et al.  (2008) (see  below).
 8. The clinical team were convinced that child analysis at a higher 
frequency would have been an optimal treatment for Michael. 
Unfortunately, this was not possible for financial reasons. The 
mother preferred to go into therapy as well after the traumatic loss 
of her husband. Her therapy turned out to be a great help for her 
as well as for Michael—from our perspective, it was one reason for 
Michael’s good development in spite of the limitations of his own 
therapy.
 9. For these children, public kindergartens have a particularly impor-
tant task to integrate these families socially, touching, as we all know, 
one of the most urgent problems of our Western societies (compare 
also children described in other subgroups; see Göppel, in press).
10. In a much less dramatic sense, we also had this problem in my native 
country, a mountain valley in Switzerland (Glarus) in the 1970s, when 

42  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
a lot of families from Sicily moved into this canton. The children had, 
due to their different cultural background, such a different tempera-
ment compared with the native Swiss population that Swiss teach-
ers, being used to the mild-tempered Swiss children, who were easy 
to handle, raised the question of whether the Italian children suf-
fered from a ‘minimal brain dysfunction’. Of course, the diagnosis of 
ADHD is not neutral but always risks a certain cultural bias.
11. Another chid psychiatrist, Fritz Poustka, gave one of the major 
papers of the Sandler Conference. Unfortunately his paper could 
not be included in this volume.
12. Unfortunately, it has not been possible to include his paper in this 
volume.
Bibliography
Ainsworth, M., Blehar, M., Waters, E. and Wall, S. (1978). Patterns of 
Attachment: A Psychological Study of the Strange Situation . Hillsdale: 
Erlbaum.
Amft, H. (2006). ‘ADHS: Hirnstoffwechselstörungen und/oder Symptom 
einer kranken Gesellschaft? Psychopharmaka als Mittel einer gelingen-
den Naturbeherrschung am Menschen.’ In: Leuzinger-Bohleber, M., 
Brandl, Y. and Hüther, G. (eds) ADHS—Frühprävention statt Medika-
lisierung: Theorie, Forschung, Kontroversen . Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & 
Ruprecht. pp. 70–90.
Amft, H., Gerspach, M. and Mattner, D. (2004). Kinder mit gestörter 
Aufmerksamkeit. ADS als Herausforderung für Pädagogik und 
Therapie. 2. Auflage . Stuttgart: Kohlhammer.
Barkley, R. (1990). Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder: A Handbook for 
Diagnosis and Treatment.  New York: Guilford Press.
Barkley, R. (1997). AD/HD and the Nature of Self-control.  New York: 
Guilford Press.
Beebe, B. and Lachman, F.M. (2002). Infant Research and Adult Treatment: 
Co-constructing Interactions.  Hillsdale/London: The Analytic Press.
Berger, E. (ed.) (1977). Teilleistungsschwächen bei Kindern.  Bern: Huber.
BMGS (Bundesministerium für Gesundheit und soziale Sicherung) 
(2002). Pressemitteilung vom . 27.12.2002. Available from: http://www.
bmgs.bund.de/archiv/presse_bmgs/presse2002/m/213.htm
Bhardway, A. and Goodyer, I.A. (2009). ‘Depression and allied illnes 
in children and asolecents. Basic facts’. Psychoanalytic Psychotherapy , 
23(3): 176–84.
Bürgin, D. (1998). Triangulierung: Der Übergang zur Elternschaft.  Stutt-
gart: Schattauer.

CONTROVERSIES ON DIFFERENT APPROACHES   4 3
Bürgin, D. (2005). Presentation, Panel, ‘Attention Deficit Hyperactivity 
Disorder and Trauma’, 44th Congress of the IPA, Rio de Janeiro, 
Brazil. 28 July.
Bürgin, D. and Steck, B. (2007). ‘Psychoanalytische psychotherapie und 
ADHD-trias (impulsivitat, hypermotorik und aufmerksamkeitss-
torungen)’. Praxis der Kinderpsychologie und Kinderpsychiatrie , 56: 
310–32.
Busch de Ahumada, L.C. (2005). Presentation, Panel, ‘Attention Deficit 
Hyperactivity Disorder and Trauma’, 44th Congress of the IPA, Rio 
de Janeiro, Brazil. 28 July.
Cantwell, D. (1996). ‘Attention Deficit Disorder: A Review of the Past 
Ten Years’. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psy-
chiatry , 35: 978–87.
Carney, J.K. (2002). ‘Prologue’. Psychoanalytic Inquiry , 22: 299–307.
Caspi, A., Sugden, K., Moffitt, T.E., Taylor, A., Craig, I.W., Harrington, H, 
McClay, J., Mill, J., Martin, J., Braithwaite, A. and Poulton, R. (2003). 
‘Influence of Life Stress on Depression: Moderation by a Polymor-
phism in the 5-HTT Gene’. Science,  301: 386–89.
Cierpka, M. and Schick, A. (2006). ‘Das Fördern von emotionalen 
Kompetenzen mit FAUSTLOS bei Kindern’. In: Leuzinger-Bohle-
ber, M., Brandl, Y. and Hüther, G. (eds) ADHS—Frühprävention statt 
Medikalisierung: Theorie, Forschung, Kontroversen . Göttingen: Vanden-
hoeck & Ruprecht. pp. 286–301.
Crary, J. (1999). Suspension of Perception.  Cambridge: MIT Press.
Damasio, A.R. (1994). Descartes’ Error.  New York: Putnam.
Damasio, A.R. (2003). ‘Feelings of emotion and the self’. Annals of the 
New York Academy of Sciences , 1,001: 253–61.
Dammasch, F. (2000). Die innere Erlebniswelt von Kindern alleinerziehender 
Mütter: Eine Studie über Vaterlosigkeit anhand einer psychoanalytischen 
Interpretation zweier Erstinterviews.  Frankfurt a.M.: Brandes & Apsel.
Dammasch, F. (2006). ADHS—endlich hat das Kind einen Namen: Psy-
choanalytische Gedanken zur Bewegung des ruhelosen Kindes und 
zur Bedeutung von Ritalin®. In: Leuzinger-Bohleber, M., Brandl, Y. 
and Hüther, G. (eds) ADHS—Frühprävention statt Medikalisierung: 
Theorie, Forschung, Kontroversen . Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht. 
pp. 189–221.
Dawirs, R.R., Teuchert-Noodt, G. and Kacza, J. (1992). ‘Naturally occur-
ring degrading events in axon terminals of the dentate gyrus and 
stratum lucidum in the spiny mouse (Acomys cahirinus) during matu-
ration, adulthood and aging’. Developmental Neuroscience , 14: 210–220.
Doidge, N. (2007). The Brain that Changes Itself: Stories of Personal Triumph 
from the Frontiers of Brain Sciences.  New York: Viking.

44  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
Dornes, M. (1999). ‘Bindungstheorie und Bindungsforschung—eine 
Herausforderung für die Schule?’ In: Garlichs, A. and Leuzinger-
Bohleber, M. (eds) M. Identität und Bindung. Die Entwicklung von 
Beziehungen in Familie, Schule und Gesellschaft . Weinheim/München: 
Juventa Verlag. pp. 161–73.
Emde, R.N. and Fonagy, P . (1997). ‘An emerging culture for psychoana-
lytic research?’ International Journal of Psychoanalysis , 78: 643–51.
Faraone, S.V ., Perlis, R.H., Doyle, A.E. et al. (2005). ‘Molecular Genetics 
of Attention-deficit/hyperactivity Disorder’. Biological Psychiatry , 57: 
1,313–23.
Fischer, G. and Riedesser, P . (1998). Lehrbuch der Psychotraumatologie . 
München/Basel: Reinhardt.
Fonagy, P . and Target, M. (2002). ‘Neubewertung der Entwicklung der 
Affektregulation vor dem Hintergrund von Winnicotts Konzept des 
“falschen Selbst”’. Psyche—Z Psychoanal , 56: 839–62.
Fonagy, P . and Target, M. (2003). Psychoanalytic Theories: Perspectives from 
Developmental Psychopathology . Stuttgart: Klett Cotta.
Fonagy, P . (2006). ‘Der Interpersonale Interpretationsmechanismus 
(IIM)’. In: Green, V . (ed.). Emotionale Entwicklung in Psychoanalyse, 
Bindungstheorie und Neuowissenschaften . Gießen: Psychosozial Verlag. 
pp. 141–65.
Fuchs, Th., Sattel, H.C. and Henningsen, P . (eds.) (2010). The Embodied 
Self. Dimensions, Coherence and Disorders . Stuttgart: Schattauer.
Garlichs, A. and Leuzinger-Bohleber, M. (1999). Identität und Bindung: 
Die Entwicklung von Beziehungen in Familie, Schule und Gesellschaft.  
Weinheim/München: Juventa Verlag.
Gerspach, M. (2006). ‘Zum Verstehen von Kindern mit Aufmerksam-
keitsstörungen’. In: Leuzinger-Bohleber, M., Brandl, Y., and Hüther, 
G. (eds) ADHS—Frühprävention statt Medikalisierung: Theorie, 
Forschung, Kontroversen . Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht. pp. 
91–110.
Gilmore, K. (2000). ‘A psychoanalytic perspective on attention-deficit/
hyperactivity disorder’. Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Associa-
tion, 48: 1,258–93.
Gilmore, K. (2002). ‘Diagnosis, dynamics, and development: Consid-
erations in the psychoanalytic assessment of children with AD/HD’. 
Psychoanalytic Inquiry , 22: 372–91.
Goldberg, D. (2009). ‘The interplay between biological and psychologi-
cal factors in determining vulnerability to mental disorder’ . Psycho-
analytic Psychotherapy , 23: 236–47.
Göppel, G. (in press). Children in Urban Areas of Social Conflict—Prevention 
and Intervention of Behavior Disorders in Kindergartens.

CONTROVERSIES ON DIFFERENT APPROACHES   4 5
Green, A. (1986). ‘The dead mother’. In: Green A. (ed.) On Private 
Madness . London: The Hogarth Press. pp. 222–53.
Green, V . (2005). Emotional Development in Psychoanalysis: Attachment 
Theory and Neuroscience. Creating Connections.  London: Brunner-
Routledge.
Grossmann, K.E., August, E.P ., Fremmer-Bombik, E., Friedl, A., Grossmann, 
K., Scheuerer-Englisch, H., Spangler, G., Stephan, C. and Suess, G.J. 
(1989). ‘Die Bindungstheorie: Modell und entwicklungspsychologische 
Forschung’. In: Keller, H. (ed.) Handbuch der Kleinkindforschung . Berlin: 
Springer. pp. 31–35.
Haubl, R. (2009). ‘Medikamentierte Wut: Wie Jungen mit einer 
AD(H)S um Selbstkontrolle ringen’. Forum der Psychoanalyse , 25: 
255–68.
Hauser, S.T., Allen, J.-P . and Golden, E. (2006). Out of the Woods: Tales of 
Resilient Teens . London: Harvard University Press.
Häußler, G. and Hopf, H. (2002). ‘Psychoanalytische Theorien’. In: 
Bovensiepen, G., Hopf, H., and Molitor, G. (eds) Unruhige und 
unaufmerksame Kinder: Psychoanalyse des hyperkinetischen Syndroms . 
Frankfurt a.M.: Brandes & Apsel. pp. 20–42.
Heinz, J. (2002). ‘Nervosität der Moderne’. In: Bovensiepen, G., Hopf, H. 
and Molitor, G. (eds) Unruhige und unaufmerksame Kinder: Psychoana-
lyse des hyperkinetischen Syndroms . Frankfurt a.M.: Brandes & Apsel. 
pp. 315–40.
Herzog, J.M. (2001). Father Hunger: Explorations with Adults and Children . 
Hillsdale/London: The Analytic Press.
Hill, J. (2009). ‘Developmental perspectives on adult depression’. Psy-
choanalytic Psychotherapy , 23, 209–12.
Hopf, H. (2007). ‘Zwischen empathie und grenzsetzungen—
Uberlegungen zur Psychodynamik und Behandlungstechnik bei psy-
choanalytischen Therapien von hyperkinetischen Störungen’. Praxis 
der Kinderpsychologie und Kinderpsychiatrie , 56: 333–55.
Hopf, H. (2009). ‘“Ich fühlte mich nicht allein in der schweren 
Situation …": Supervision der psychoanalytischen Behandlung 
eines neunjahrigen Jungen mit der facharztlichen Diagnose ADHS’. 
Kinderanalyse , 17: 335–65.
Hüther, G. (2006). ‘Die nutzungsabhängige Herausbildung hir-
norganischer Veränderungen bei Hyperaktivität und Aurmerk-
samkeitsstörungen: Einfluss präventiver Maßnahmen und 
therapeutischer Internventionen’. In: Leuzinger-Bohleber, M., 
Brandl, Y. and Hüther, G. (eds) ADHS—Frühprävention statt Medika-
lisierung: Theorie, Forschung, Kontroversen . Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & 
Ruprecht. pp. 222–37.

46  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
Kawai, T. (2009). ‘Union and Separation in the Therapy of Pervasive 
Developmental Disorders and ADHD’. Journal of Analytical Psychol-
ogy, 54: 659–75.
Klitzing, K.V . (2002). ‘Früher Entwicklung im Längsschnitt: Von der 
Beziehungswelt der Eltern zur Vorstellungswelt des Kindes’. 
Psyche—Z Psychoanal , 56: 863–87.
Laezer, L., Gaertner, B., Werner, I., Weisenburger. and Leuzinger-Bohleber, 
M. (2010): ‘Therapievergleichsstudie von psychoanalytischen und 
kognitiv-verhaltenstherapeutisch/medikamentösen Behandlungen 
von hyperaktiven Kindern’. Poster presented at the Joseph Sandler 
Research Conference, February, 2010
Laezer, L. (in prep). Wirksamkeit psychotherapeutischer Behandlun-
gen bei Kindern mit ADHS und der Störung des Sozialverhaltens—
Psychoanalyse, Verhaltenstherapie und psychiatrische Behandlung 
im Vergleich. Habilitationsstudie an der Universität Kassel.
Laufer, M. and Dehnhoff, E. (1957). ‘Hyperkinetic behavior syndrome 
in children’. Journal of Pediatrics , 50: 463–74.
Lehmkuhl, G. and Döpfner, M. (2006). ‘Die Bedeutung multimo-
daler Therapieansätze bei Kindern mit Aufmerksamkeitsdefizit-/
Hyperkativitätsstörungen’. In: Leuzinger-Bohleber, M., Brandl, Y., 
and Hüther, G. (eds) ADHS—Frühprävention statt Medikalisierung: 
Theorie, Forschung, Kontroversen . Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht. 
pp. 118–33.
Leuzinger-Bohleber, M. and Pfeifer, R. (2002). ‘Remembering a depres-
sive primary object? Psychoanalysis and Embodied Cognitive 
Science: A dialogue on memory’. International Journal of Psychoanaly-
sis, 83: 3–33.
Leuzinger-Bohleber, M., Dreher, A.U. and Canestri, J. (eds) (2003). 
Pluralism and Unity? Methods of Research in Psychoanalysis . 
London: IPA.
Leuzinger-Bohleber, M. and Pfeifer, R. (2006). ‘Recollecting the past in 
the present: Memory in the dialogue between psychoanalysis and 
cognitive science’. In: Mancia, M. (ed.) Psychoanalyis and Neuroscience . 
Milano: Springer. pp. 63–95.
Leuzinger-Bohleber, M., Brandl, Y., and Hüther, G. (eds) (2006). ADHS—
Frühprävention statt Medikalisierung: Theorie, Forschung, Kontroversen . 
Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.
Leuzinger-Bohleber, M., Brandl, Y., Hau, S., Aulbach, L., Caruso, B., 
Einert, K.-M., Glindemann, O., Göppel, G., Hermann, P ., Hesse, 
P ., Heumann, J., Karaca, G., König, J., Lendle, J., Rüger, B., Sch-
wenk, A., Staufenberg, A., Steuber, S., Uhl, Ch., Vogel, J., Waldung, 
Ch., Wolff, L. and Hüther, G. (2006). ‘Die Frankfurter Präven-
tionsstudie. Zur psychischen und psychosozialen Integration 

CONTROVERSIES ON DIFFERENT APPROACHES   4 7
von verhaltensauffälligen Kindern (insbesondere ADHS) im 
Kindergartenalter—ein Arbeitsbericht’. In: Leuzinger-Bohleber, M., 
Brandl, Y. and Hüther, G. (eds) ADHS—Frühprävention statt Medika-
lisierung: Theorie, Forschung, Kontroversen . Göttingen: Vandenhoeck 
& Ruprecht. pp. 238–69.
Leuzinger-Bohleber, M. and Fischmann, T. (2006). ‘What is conceptual 
research in psychoanalysis?’ International Journal of Psychoanalysis , 87: 
1,355–86.
Leuzinger-Bohleber, M., Staufenberg, A. and Fischmann, T. (2007). 
‘ADHS—Indikation für psychoanalytische Behandlungen? Einige 
klinische, konzeptuelle und empirische Überlegungen ausgehend 
von der Frankfurter Präventionsstudie’. Praxis der Kidnerpsychologie 
und Kinderpsychiatrie , 56: 356–85.
Leuzinger-Bohleber, M., Rother, G. and Buchheim, A. (Hg.) (2008). 
Psychoanalyse, Neurobiologie, Trauma . Stuttgart: Schattauer.
Leuzinger-Bohleber, M., Fischmann, T. and Läzer, L. (2008). 
‘Triangulierung—ein zentrales Konzept der Frankfurter Prävention-
sstudie?’ In: Dammasch, D., Katzenbach, D. and Ruth, J. (Hg.). Tri-
angulierung. Lernen, Denken und Handeln aus psychoanalytischer Sicht . 
Frankfurt a. M.: Brandes & Apsel. pp. 131–65.
Leuzinger-Bohleber, M., Röckerath, K. and Strauss, L.V . (Hg.) (2010). 
Depression und Neuroplastizität. Psychoanalytische Klinik und Forschung . 
Frankfurt: Brandes & Apsel.
Levin, F.M. (1997). ‘Discussion of Mark Solms’ “Why consciousness?”’ 
Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Association , 45: 732–39.
Lüpke, H.V . (2004). ‘Hyperaktivität zwischen “Stoffwechselstörung” 
und Psychodynamik’. In: Passolt, M. (ed.) Hyperaktivität zwischen 
Psychoanalyse, Neurobiologie und Systemtheorie. 2. Auflage.  München/
Basel: Reinhardt. pp. 99–116.
Lüpke, H.V . (2006). ‘Der Dialog in Bewegung und der entgleiste Dialog: 
Beiträge aus Säuglingsforschung und Neurobiologie’. In: Leuzinger-
Bohleber, M., Brandl, Y. and Hüther, G. (eds) ADHS—Frühprävention 
statt Medikalisierung: Theorie, Forschung, Kontroversen . Göttingen: 
Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht. pp. 169–88.
Mattner, D. (2006). ‘ADS—die Biologisierung abweichenden Verhaltens’. 
In: Leuzinger-Bohleber, M., Brandl, Y., and Hüther, G. (eds) ADHS—
Frühprävention statt Medikalisierung: Theorie, Forschung, Kontroversen . 
Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht. pp. 51–69.
McWilliams, Nancy (2009): Some Thoughts on the Survival of Psycho-
analytic Practice. Clinical Social Work Journal , 37: 81–83.
Metzger, H.-G. (2000). Zwischen Dyade und Triade. Psychoanalytische Fam-
ilienbeobachtungen zur Bedeutung des Vaters im Triangulierungsprozeß . 
Tübingen: Edition diskord.

48  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
Moll, G.H., Mehnert, C., Wicker, M., Bock, N., Rothenberger, A., 
Rüther, E. and Hüther, G. (2000). ‘Age-associated changes in the den-
sities of presynaptic monoamine transporters in different regions of 
the rat brain from juvenile life to adulthood’. Developmental Brain 
Research , 119: 251–57.
Myssior, S. and Machado, Z. (2008). O que sera da atividade das cri-
ancas? (Notas sobre a hiperatividade). Percurso Revista de Psicanalise , 
21: 75–80.
Nelson, C.A. (2007): ‘What would Superman do?’ In: Rubin, L. (ed.) 
Using Superheroes in Counseling and Play Therapy . New York: Springer. 
pp. 49–67.
Panksepp, J. (1998). Affective Neuroscience: The Foundation of Human 
and Animal Emotions.  New York: Oxford University Press.
Panksepp, J. (2001). ‘The long-term psychobiological consequences of 
infant emotions’. Neuro-Psychoanalysis , 3: 149–79.
Passolt, M. (ed.) (2004). Hyperaktivität zwischen Psychoanalyse, Neurobiol-
ogie und Systemtheorie.  2. Aufl. München/Basel: Reinhardt.
Pfeifer, R. and Bongard, J. (2007). How the Body Shapes the Way We Think: 
A New View of Intelligence . Cambridge: MIT Press.
Pfeifer, R. and Scheier, C. (1999). Understanding Intelligence . Cambridge: 
MIT Press.
Randa, A. et al. (2005). ‘Cytogenetic Effects in Children Treated with 
Methylphenidate’. Cancer Letters , 230: 284–91.
Reichert, Y. (2010). ‘Psychoanalytisch-familientherapeutische Behand-
lung eines Kindes mit ADHS vor dem Hintergrund von elterlicher 
Verlusttraumatisierung, Regulationsstorung und transgeneration-
aler Ubertragung’. Kinderanalyse , 18: 74–93.
Riedesser, P . (2006). ‘Einige Argumente zur ADHS-Kontroverse in 
der Kinder—und Jugendpsychiatrie’. In: Leuzinger-Bohleber, M., 
Brandl, Y. and Hüther, G. (eds) ADHS—Frühprävention statt Medika-
lisierung: Theorie, Forschung, Kontroversen . Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & 
Ruprecht. pp. 111–17.
Risch, N., Herrell, R., Lehner, Th., Liang, K., Eaves, L., Hoh, J., Griem, 
A., Kovacs, M., Otto, J. and Ries Merikangas, K. (2009). ‘Interac-
tion between the serotonin transproter gene (5-HTTLPR), stressful 
life events, and the risk of depression. A meta-analysis’. JAMA , 23: 
2,462–71.
Romanos, M., Freitag, C., Jacob, C. et al. (2008). ‘Genome-wide Linkage 
Analysis of ADHD Using High-density SNP Arrays: Novel loci at 
5q13.1 and 14q12’. Molecular Psychiatry , 13: 522–30.
Rothstein, A. (2002). ‘Plea for a balanced conception of AD/HD and 1st 
diagnosis and treatment’. Psychoanalytic Inquiry , 22: 391–412.

CONTROVERSIES ON DIFFERENT APPROACHES   4 9
Rothstein, A. and Glenn, J. (1999). Learning Disabilities and Psychic 
Conflict: A Psychoanalytic Casebook . Madison: International Universi-
ties Press.
Ruf-Bächtiger, L. (1987). Das frühkindliche psychoorganische Syndrom . 
Stuttgart: Thieme.
Rutter, M. (2009). ‘Gene-Environment Interactions. Biologi-
cally vaid pathway or artifact?’ Arch Gen Psychiatry,  66(12): 
1,287–89.
Salomonsson, B. (2004). ‘Some psychoanalytic viewpoints on 
neuropsychiatric disorders in children’. International Journal of Psy-
choanalysis , 85: 117–36.
Salomonsson, B. (2006). ‘The Impact of Words on Children with ADHD 
and DAMP: Consequences for Psychoanalytic Technique’. Int. J. 
Psycho-Anal.,  87:1029–1047.
Schulte-Körne, G. and Allgaie, A.-K. (2008). ‘Genetik depressiver 
Störungen’. Zeitschrift für Kinder- und Jugendpsychiatrie und Psychote-
hrapie , 36 (1): 27–43.
Seeman, P . and Machias, B.K. (1998). ‘Anti-hyperactivity medica-
tion: methylphenidate and amphetamine’. Molecular Psychiatry , 3: 
386–96.
Sennett, R. (1998). The Corrosion of Character: The Personal Consequences of 
Work in the New Capitalism . New York: Norton.
Soltano, M.V . (1998). ‘Neuropsychopharmacological mechanisms of 
stimulant drug action in attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder: 
A review and integration’. Behavioural Brain Research , 94: 127–52.
Stassen, H., Begleiter, H., Beirut, L., Culverhouse, R., Hinrichs, T., 
Porjesz, B., Rice, J., Scharfetter, C. and Reich, T. (2004a). ‘Oligogenic 
approaches to the predisposition of alcohol dependence: A genome-
wide search on 255 families’. Neurology, Psychiatry and Brain Research , 
11: 13–22.
Stassen, H.H., Bridler, R., Hell, D., Weisbrod, M. and Scharfetter, C. 
(2004b). ‘Ethnicity-independent genetic basis of functional psycho-
ses: A Genotype-to-phenotype approach’. American Journal of Medical 
Genetics , 124: 101–12.
Staufenberg, A. et al. (2006). Manual zur psychoanalytisch-psychothera-
peutischen Behandlung psychosozialer Integrationsproblemen bei Kinder. 
Die Fraunkfurter Präventionsstudie).  Unpublished.
Staufenberg, A. (in press ). Psychoanalytische Behandlungen von hyper-
aktiven Kindern. Eine Katamnesestudie. Will be published 2011, 
Frankfurt: Brandes u. Apsel
Stern, D. (1995). The Motherhood Constellation: A Unified View of Parent-
infant Psychotherapy . New York: Basic Books.

50  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
Still, G.F. (1902). ‘Some abnormal psychical conditions in children’. 
Lancet , 1: 1,008–12; 1,077–82; 1,163–68.
Sugarman, A. (2006). ‘Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder and 
Trauma’. International Journal of Psychoanalysis , 87: 237–41.
Sugarman, A. (2010). ‘Convergences and Divergences in Treatments of 
So-Called ADHD Children’. International Journal of Psychoanalysis , 91: 
395–98.
Suomi, S. (2006). ‘Risk, Resilience and Genex Environment Interactions 
in Rhesus Monkeys’. New York Academy of Science : 52–62.
Waldung, C., Göppel, G. and Wolff, L. (2006). ‘Ein Fallbeispiel 
(Die Frankfurter Präventionsstudie)’. In: Leuzinger-Bohleber, M., 
Brandl, Y., and Hüther, G. (eds) ADHS—Frühprävention statt Medika-
lisierung: Theorie, Forschung, Kontroversen . Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & 
Ruprecht. pp. 256–62.
Zabarenko, L.M. (2002). ‘AD/HD, Psychoanalysis and neuroscience: 
A survey of recent findings and their applications’. Psychoanalytic 
Inquiry , 22: 412–32.

PART II
EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS 
DISTURBANCES



53CHAPTER TWO
Attachment, trauma, 
and psychoanalysis: Where 
psychoanalysis meets neuroscience
Peter Fonagy
Why do we do this to each other?
Trauma is puzzling: a couple of deeply puzzling vignettes to start us 
off. James is currently in prison for armed robbery. His father was 
frequently violent towards James, in the name of punishment. On 
one occasion, at the age of nine, James was punished for stealing. 
This is how James later described that incident:
he put the gas cooker on, right, and um—I will always remember 
this, he put a hand on top of the gas cooker, and roasted our 
hands (your hand) yeah, my hand, and uhm—the next day 
I went to school with gloves on, because they [were] really, 
really bad …
James’ reactions to these and dozens of similar experiences is telling: 
‘I used to have a drink and sleep and when I wake up I was a dif-
ferent person.’ When asked to describe if he ever felt upset, James is 
completely unable to understand the question. ‘When I was young I 
never really got upset because I had everything I wanted really and 
when you get everything that you want you don’t really get upset.’ 

54  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
When asked how his childhood experiences might have affected 
his adult personality, he responds totally without insight: ‘I cannot 
explain, I can’t, it’s not even up there for me to explain.’
In case you think that James is a special case, let me introduce 
you to Stuart, also a robber, and also violent and dangerous. Stuart 
was brought up by his mother and a succession of stepfathers; he 
was traumatized particularly by his second one. In Stuart’s and his 
mother’s mind, his stepfather just wanted to ‘straighten him out’. If 
he behaved badly he would be beaten when his father came home, 
and every night afterwards for a period of a week. Once Stuart was 
caught shoplifting and was brought home by the police. This is what 
followed: ‘He tied me to the bed … and he got a screwdriver, and 
he was stabbing me in the hands with it, because they [the hands] 
were what stole … and I was just laughing at him, ‘cause I was … 
I don’t know … And then he went downstairs, and he got a hammer 
and nails, and he nailed one of my hands to the board of the bed, 
like. Just stuck a nail straight through my hand, like. Like, so I was 
howling, I couldn’t move, and the blood was … and I was scream-
ing then. I had to cry then, I couldn’t handle it. And after they had 
done it, my hands went numb, so I couldn’t feel it. And I looked at 
my hands, and I started laughing at myself. And I felt I was going 
mad, like, cause I was going “Ha ha”, you know, and I was thinking, 
“I had done that . ”’
When upset, as with many severe trauma victims, Stuart attacks 
himself, hitting the walls with all his considerable force: ‘The amount 
of times I’ve broken my hands, my arms, you know. Five times, 
in six months. Different arms.’ Like other abused children, Stuart 
expressed gratitude to his stepfather for hardening him, enabling 
him to take violence from others.
When Stuart was 12 his stepfather threatened to shoot him and 
had to be disarmed by the police. His mother then arranged for 
Stuart to be taken into care, explaining that this was for his own 
protection.
Two weeks before the interview, this stepfather, long estranged 
from his mother, committed suicide. At the inquest into this death, his 
mother screamed across the courtroom that it was all Stuart’s fault: 
‘… she starts screaming in the court. And then I went; I flipped my lid 
there. I jumped out of the dock. I grabbed a hold of her by the hair, like, 
and I was banging her head off. The police had to get me off her.’

ATTACHMENT, TRAUMA, AND PSYCHOANALYSIS   5 5
Stuart, like the others we interviewed, shows a bizarre lack 
of understanding of what makes him, his mother, his stepfather, 
or indeed anyone else, tick. When I asked about the effects of his 
attachment trauma on his adult personality, he admits to ‘going over 
the top’ but also says, ‘I mean, I am not a danger to anyone; I am a 
danger to myself, not other people.’ He seems genuinely unaware 
of how other people experience his violent outbursts. In prison, not 
only the guards but also his fellow inmates are scared of him. You 
will not be surprised to hear that his behaviour in prison often gets 
extremely severe punishments from the system.
A psychoanalytic development phenomenology 
of the response to attachment trauma
I will begin by describing the trauma-related loss of the capacity to 
conceive of mental states.
Often in adults with a history of childhood attachment trauma 
there seems to be an acquired failure to conceive of how people 
think and/or feel. We call this a failure of mentalization. Mentaliza-
tion is a concept originally introduced by French psychoanalysts1 
(Luquet, 1981, 1987; Marty and De M’Uzan, 1963) working with psy-
chosomatic patients. They noted a lack of symbolization of mental 
states in such individuals, a lack of freedom in free association, and 
a characteristic way of thinking too close to sensations and primary 
unconscious fantasies.
We define mentalization following a tradition in philosophy of 
mind established by Brentano (1973/1874), Dennett (1978), and oth-
ers, as a form of mostly preconscious imaginative  mental activity, 
namely, interpreting people’s actions in terms of ‘intentional’ mental 
states. It is imaginative  because we have to imagine what other peo-
ple might be thinking or feeling; an important indicator of the high 
quality of mentalization is the awareness that we do not actually 
know what is in someone else’s mind. The same kind of imaginative 
leap can be required to understand one’s own mental experience, 
particularly in relation to emotionally charged issues or irrational 
(perhaps unconsciously driven) reactions. Some philosophers of 
mind have suggested that psychic determinism (the discovery that 
human actions could be more completely understood by ascribing 
unconscious wishes and beliefs in addition to conscious states) was 

56  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
Freud’s greatest contribution (Hopkins, 1992; Wollheim, 1999). To 
adopt this stance, to conceive of self and others as having a ‘mind’, 
the individual needs a symbolic representational system for mental 
states. Although mentalization probably involved numerous contact 
systems, it is commonly associated with activation in the middle 
prefrontal areas of the brain—probably the paracingulate area.
The difficulty of traumatized patients in understanding them-
selves and others struck us forcibly over 15 years ago while treating 
borderline women and violent men (Fonagy, 1989). A later study of 
the psychoanalytic treatment of 30 young adults with violent and 
suicidal behaviour, led by Anne-Marie Sandler at the Anna Freud 
Centre, reinforced these conclusions (Gerber, 2004; Perelberg, 1999).2 
83% were in analysis (29% psychotherapy).
What does it look like when trauma brings about a temporary col-
lapse of mentalization? James describes thinking: ‘I keep doing these 
crazy things. Why am I doing these things? I was confused. I used to 
just sit down for hours sometimes and drive myself mad, thinking. 
And I just didn’t get anywhere. It used to wind me up.’ Research has 
shown that the capacity for mentalization is undermined in most 
people who have experienced trauma. Children cannot learn words 
for feelings (Beeghly and Cicchetti, 1994), and traumatized adults 
have more difficulty recognizing the intent behind facial expres-
sions. (Fonagy et al. , 2003).
The equation of inner and outer is a second aspect of the phenom-
enology. The collapse of mentalization in the face of trauma entails 
a loss of awareness of the relationship between internal and external 
reality (Fonagy and Target, 2000). Modes of representing the inter-
nal world re-emerge that developmentally precede an awareness 
that thoughts, feelings, and wishes are part of the mind. The child 
aged two to three, not yet experiencing their mind as truly repre-
sentational, assumes that what they think exists also in the physi-
cal world. This generates a lack of flexibility which we have termed 
‘psychic equivalence’: mental states are equated with physical reality 
(Fonagy and Target, 1996; Target & Fonagy, 1996). Not only is there 
an omnipotence of subjectivity (‘I know what is right’) but also eve-
rything that is out there is felt to be known (‘You can’t tell me any-
thing’). This of course leaves no room for alternative perspectives.
The three-year-old’s acute fear of a fantasy (the tiger under 
their bed and such) is highly compelling. Post-traumatic subjective 

ATTACHMENT, TRAUMA, AND PSYCHOANALYSIS   5 7
experience (the flashback) is similarly compelling, resistant to 
argument, and, until it becomes mentalized, feels dangerous. Often, 
survivors of trauma simply refuse to think about their experience 
because thinking about it means reliving it. They may show marked 
psychic equivalence even in other, different, contexts. James talked 
about writing letters: ‘When you write to someone, it’s like, you’re 
going in that letter, you put your hand in the letter, or your whole 
body’s in the letter. And when they open the letter, the words, you 
are the words so you know, it’s like you’re outside, but you’re still 
in, still in prison.’ Aspects of psychic equivalence overlap with 
descriptions of paranoid-schizoid forms of thinking, particularly as 
formulated by Wilfrid Bion (1963) in the Elements of Psychoanalysis  
(Hobson et al. , 1998), and the symbolic equation as formulated by 
Hanna Segal (1957).
Separation from reality is the third aspect of the phenomology of 
attachment trauma. The pretend mode is a developmental comple-
ment to psychic equivalence. Not yet able to conceive of internal 
experience as mental, the child’s fantasies are dramatically divided 
off from the external world. Small children cannot simultaneously 
pretend (even though they know it is not real) and engage with nor-
mal reality; asking them if their pretend gun is a gun or a stick spoils 
the game.
Following trauma and the constriction of mentalization we see 
the intrusion of the pretend mode, particularly in dissociative expe-
riences. In dissociated thinking, nothing can be linked to anything—
the principle of the ‘pretend mode’, in which fantasy is cut off from 
the real world, is extended so that nothing has implications (Fonagy 
and Target, 2000). The compulsive search for meaning (hyperactive 
mentalization), what James describes as ‘driving himself mad’, is 
a common reaction against the sense of emptiness and disconnec-
tion that the pretend mode generates. Patients report ‘blanking out’, 
‘clamming up’, or remembering their traumatic experiences only 
in dreams. The most characteristic feature of traumatization is the 
oscillation between psychic equivalence and pretend modes of expe-
riencing the internal world.
‘I believe it when I see it,’ is a further pre-mentalistic aspect of psy-
chic reality. It is the re-emergence of a teleological mode of thought. 
This mode of understanding the world antedates even language. 
Infants as young as nine months of age are able to attribute goals 

58  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
to people and to objects that seem to behave purposefully, but these 
goals are not yet truly mental, they are tied to what is observable. 
The return of this teleological mode of thought is perhaps the most 
painful aspect of a subjectivity stripped of mentalization.
Following trauma, verbal reassurance means little. Interacting 
with others at a mental level has been replaced by attempts at alter-
ing thoughts and feelings through action. Most trauma, certainly 
physical and sexual abuse, is by definition teleological. It is hardly 
surprising that the victim feels that the mind of another can only be 
altered in this same mode, through a physical act, threat, or seduc-
tion. Stuart described his feelings about being sent to live in a hostel 
at the age of eleven as follows: ‘I tried to make them understand that 
I was upset so I was throwing things quite a lot. I threw my bed out 
of the window. I broke all the windows in the room. The only way 
I could make them understand that I did not like it.’ It is not just 
those who are severely traumatized like Stuart who find physical 
modes of expression more persuasive than words—words which are 
all too easily experienced as meaningless within a pretend mode. 
Following trauma we all need physical assurances of security.
A neuroscientific-attachment theory understanding 
of the loss of mentalization associated with trauma
Attachment theory and trauma
Attachment theory and research offer a useful starting point for 
understanding the impact of trauma. Trauma triggers the attachment 
system.  As John Bowlby pointed out, it inhibits exploration and acti-
vates affectional bonds (Bowlby, 1969). We feel distressed and we 
want to be hugged. The 7/7 incidents triggered the need to belong to 
a community in Londoners; as 9/11 did in New York, and 3/11 did 
in Madrid. Crisis most challenges those whose capacity for relation-
ship is weakest, while a history of secure attachments increases the 
chances of responding to trauma in relatively adaptive ways. Why?
Classical attachment and some object relations theories contend 
that templates of relationships are established in infancy and are 
enacted in later development (Bretherton and Munholland, 1999; 
Crittenden, 1994; Sroufe, 1996). Early traumatic experiences estab-
lish such early relationship expectations, and later ones activate and 

ATTACHMENT, TRAUMA, AND PSYCHOANALYSIS   5 9
interact with them. A child of parental conflict whose attachments 
have been disrupted and their sense of security undermined, perhaps 
often expects to be rejected. Such a child might dismiss a helper in 
much the same way as the infant in the strange situation feels she 
cannot afford to turn to the caregiver for comfort.
This is a simplistic model from a psychoanalytic perspective. For 
example, to understand adult violence as a mere repetition of attach-
ment trauma fails to reflect the extent of the devastation wreaked on 
a child’s psychological integrity. To understand this devastation we 
have to go back in time, not just through the child’s life, but right 
back through two million years of human evolution now illumi-
nated by a combination of fossil and neuroscientific investigations.
The evolution of the social brain
The most generally accepted model of how humans evolved was 
proposed by Richard Alexander (1989). It suggests that our excep-
tional intelligence evolved not to deal with the hostile forces of 
nature but rather to deal with competition from other people. This 
occurred only after our species had achieved relative dominance 
over its environment. At that point it seems we became our ‘own 
principal hostile forces of nature’ (Alexander, 1989: 469).
All species face competition from within, but humans are spe-
cial in the role that social groups3 play in achieving success in this 
type of competition. There was a kind of ‘evolutionary arms race’ 
among ever more effective social groups (Flinn et al. , 2005). This 
effectiveness depended on skill in social cognition, which has much 
in common with the psychoanalytic concept which we have called 
mentalization, the symbolic representation of mental states: to know, 
to understand other people also allows one to outsmart them.4 As 
the intelligence of the opposition increased so did the requirement 
for ever greater ability for communication, imaginative social and 
emotional understanding, and the anticipation of others’ reactions—
capacities finely honed in most psychoanalysts!
The brain and self and other awareness
Brain studies and fossil records suggest that self-awareness most 
likely evolved in order to aid other awareness. Closely associated 

60  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
with evolutionary changes in social intelligence were changes in 
human brain structure. There was a modest proportional expansion 
(about 10%) in parts of the prefrontal cortex (Semendeferi and 
Damasio, 2000), with an increased richness of interconnections 
between neurones in these areas. There are unique features of human 
neuroanatomy that underpin social interpretation such as increased 
lateralization. There was a disproportionate expansion of the right 
prefrontal cortex and the frontal pole (Holloway, 1996; Zilles et al. , 
1996). These areas of the brain have been shown by imaging studies 
to be involved in self-awareness, the ability to remember personal 
experiences, and to project oneself into the future (Tulving, 2002). 
Self-awareness enables us to modify the way we wish to present 
ourselves, and also to mislead. The right prefrontal cortex may be 
there ‘to allow us to see ourselves as others see us so that we may 
cause competitive others to see us as we wish them to’ (Alexander, 
1990: 7). Thus the original evolutionary function of subjective expe-
riences such as daydreams and fantasies might have been to allow 
individuals to form goals, carry out plans, and integrate these within 
a seamless knowledge of one’s life history (Levine, 1999).
It seems that self-awareness and awareness of the mental states 
of others are closely linked, certainly in terms of the brain areas 
involved. Mentalization was there not mainly to facilitate collabo-
ration and positive relationships but to facilitate social survival. 
Mentalization serves competition: more like the antlers of a rein-
deer (used to fight other reindeer) than the eyes of the hawk (used 
to find prey).
What are the implications of this for our 
understanding of attachment trauma?
Attachment and the arms-race of mentalization
As the mind needs to adapt to variable conditions, the capacity 
for mentalization is prepared but not fixed by genetics. Increased 
sophistication in social cognition evolved hand in hand with greater 
helplessness in infancy, the prolongation of childhood, and the emer-
gence of intensive parenting (Geary and Huffman, 2002; Hrdy, 2000; 
Siegal and Varley, 2002). Evolution, it seems, has charged attach-
ment relationships with ensuring the full development of the social 

ATTACHMENT, TRAUMA, AND PSYCHOANALYSIS   6 1
brain. The child discovers minds in his objects as he tries to find 
himself as thinking and feeling in their actions. The child’s capacity 
to represent mental states symbolically has long been assumed by 
psychoanalysts to be acquired within the primary object relation-
ship. The idea is clearest in Bion, but is implicit in Fairbairn, expli-
cated in Winnicott, restated in Kohut, and rediscovered with new 
emphases by relational writers such as S. Mitchell.5 The work I have 
been referring to allows us to see how and why brains have evolved 
to nurture this capacity within the parent–infant relationship. This is 
why the disruption of early affectional bonds not only sets up mala-
daptive attachment patterns but also undermines a range of capaci-
ties vital to normal social development.
The neurobiology of attachment
Recent neuroimaging studies cast an intriguing light on the 
association of attachment with the development of mentalization. 
The neurobiology of attachment is now fairly well understood.6 In 
brief it seems that changes in attachment behaviour, such as falling 
in love, which are stimulated by social/sexual activity, entails the 
activation of an oxytocin and vasopressin sensitive circuit within the 
anterior hypothalamus (MPOA) linked to the VTA and the nucleus 
accumbens shell (Insel, 2003). Functional Imaging studies indicate 
specific activation of the same pathways in the brain of somebody 
seeing their own baby or their partner, as compared to another famil-
iar baby or someone else’s partner (Nitschke et al. , 2004).
Bartels and Zeki (2000, 2004), in two separate imaging studies, 
reported that the activation of areas mediating maternal and/or 
romantic attachments appeared simultaneously to suppress brain 
activity in regions associated with making social judgements and 
mentalizing. This suggests that being in an intensely emotionally 
attached state inhibits mentalizing and the capacity accurately to see 
the attachment figure as a person.
These findings are extremely important. Taking the evolution-
ary perspective just elaborated, competition requires thinking about 
motives, but attachment involves trust. To be attached to someone 
is to be predisposed to trust them, to assume that their motives 
are known and benign. The phrase ‘love is blind’ must exist in a 
number of languages. As attachment suppresses mentalization, 

62  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
the mental states of the attachment figures will perhaps always 
remain somewhat enigmatic. Perhaps psychoanalysis provides a 
much-needed opportunity for clarification and elaboration of the 
thoughts and feelings of attachment figures in the past and present 
precisely because the ‘heat’ has moved from them to the analyst in 
the transference.
The configuration described by Bartels and Zeki has critical 
developmental implications. To acquire the capacity to think about 
mental states is likely to be facilitated by attachment, because it makes 
for a safe context for making mistakes. Missing out on early attach-
ment experience (as for the Romanian orphans) creates a long-term 
vulnerability from which the child may never recover—the capacity 
for mentalization is never fully established, leaving the child vulner-
able to later trauma and unable to cope fully with attachment rela-
tionships (O’Connor et al. , 2003; Rutter and O’Connor, 2004). More 
importantly, trauma, by activating attachment, will cause the sup-
pression of the capacity for mentalization. This of course is greatly 
exacerbated when the trauma is attachment trauma. It is to three 
related clinical aspects of this issue that we now turn.
The hyperactivation of the attachment system is the first of these. 
Attachment is normally the ideal ‘training ground’ for the devel-
opment of mentalization because it is safe and non-competitive. 
This biological configuration, which is so adaptive in the context of 
normal development, becomes immensely destructive in the pres-
ence of attachment trauma. Attachment trauma hyperactivates the 
attachment system because the person to whom the child looks for 
reassurance and protection is the one causing fear. The devastating 
psychic impact of attachment trauma is then the combined result 
of the inhibition of mentalization by attachment and the hyperacti-
vation of the attachment system by trauma. This context demands 
extraordinary mentalizing capacities from the child, yet the hyper-
activation of the attachment system will have suppressed the lim-
ited capacity that they have.
The coincidence of trauma and attachment creates a biologi-
cal vicious cycle. Trauma normally leads a child to seek safety in 
being close to the attachment figure. This generates a characteris-
tic dependency on the maltreating figure, with the real risk of an 
escalating sequence of further maltreatment, increased distress, and 
an ever greater inner need for the attachment figure. The inhibition 

ATTACHMENT, TRAUMA, AND PSYCHOANALYSIS   6 3
of mentalization in a traumatizing, hyperactivated attachment 
relationship is always likely to lead to a prementalistic psychic 
reality, largely split into psychic equivalence and pretend modes. 
The memory of the trauma feels currently real so that there is a con-
stant danger of re-traumatization from inside. The traumatized child 
often begins to fear their own mind, needing the attachment figure 
even more. The inhibition of mentalization is often an intrapsychic 
adaptation to traumatic violent attachment. The frankly malevolent 
mental state of the abuser terrifies the helpless child. The parents’ 
abuse undermines the child’s capacity to mentalize, because it is no 
longer safe for the child, for example, to think about wishing, if this 
implies recognizing their parent’s wish to harm them.
A further complication follows because the child with attachment 
trauma who phobically avoids the mind of the parent cannot use 
the other as mirror to understand the self, and diffusion of identity 
and dissociation can be the conscience. Even more pernicious is the 
state when, desperate for some kind of self-awareness, psychic real-
ity comes to be experienced through incorporating the other as part 
of the self. Recall Stuart’s description of how after feeling numb he 
looked at his hands, and started laughing at himself: ‘I was going 
“Ha ha”, you know, and I was thinking, “ I had done that .”’ Of course 
this process, taking the perspective of the other intent on destroying 
him, is very similar to what Anna Freud described as the process of 
identification with the aggressor.
The second aspect concerns arousal, the ‘biology of being frazzled’. 
The impact of trauma on mentalization is intermittent. Sometimes 
the disappearance of mentalization is to do with the intensifica-
tion of an attachment relationship, for example in the course of an 
analysis. At other times, being stressed (for example, touching on a 
sensitive issue) can trigger what feel like wild, unjustified reactions. 
Six years ago, in a hallmark paper in Science entitled ‘The biology 
of being frazzled’, Amy Arnsten (1998) explained why (see also on 
this subject Arnsten et al., 1999; Mayes, 2000). At the risk of sim-
plifying highly complex pioneering neuroscientific work, Arnsten’s 
Dual Arousal Systems Model delineates two complementary, inde-
pendent arousal systems: the prefrontal and posterior cortical and 
subcortical systems (Arnsten, 1998; Arnsten et al. , 1999; Mayes, 
2000). The system that activates frontal and pre-frontal regions 
inhibits the second arousal system that normally ‘kicks in’ only at 

64  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
quite high levels of arousal, when pre-frontal activity goes ‘offline’ 
and posterior cortical and subcortical functions (for example, more 
automatic or motor functions, not thinking so much as running) 
take over.
The switch-point between the two arousal systems may be shifted 
by childhood trauma. Undoubtedly, as mentalization involves the 
prefrontal cortex, this accounts for some of the inhibition of mentali-
zation in individuals with attachment trauma, in response to increases 
in arousal that would not be high enough to inhibit mentalization in 
most of us. ‘I just snap. You know what I mean. It’s like a switch. But 
I don’t like it. I hate it. But I just can’t help myself for doing it.’
In the light of this phenomenon it is important for analysts to 
monitor the traumatized patient’s readiness to hear comments about 
thoughts and feelings. As arousal increases, in part in response to 
interpretative work, traumatized patients cannot process talk about 
their minds. Interpretations of the transference at these times, how-
ever accurate they might be, are likely to be way beyond the capac-
ity of the patient to hear. The clinical priority has to be to reduce 
arousal so that the patient can again think of other perspectives 
(mentalize).
Finally, and clinically most significant, is projective identification, 
which becomes a matter of life and death.
Bion’s (1963: 3) first element in his elements of psychoanalysis 
is ‘the essential feature of Melanie Klein’s conception of projective 
identification … the dynamic relationship between container and 
contained’. Edith Jacobson (1954) and Donald Winnicott (1956) 
independently noted that the internalization of the representation 
of another before the boundaries of the self are fully formed under-
mines the creation of a coherent sense of self. The infant is forced to 
internalize the other not as an internal object but as a core part of their 
self. If the caregiver fails to contain the infant’s anxieties, metabolize 
them, and mirror the self state, the infant, rather than gradually con-
structing a representation of their internal states through mirroring 
and ‘normal’ projective identification, is forced to accommodate the 
object, an alien being, within their self-representation.
Of course these introjections in traumatized individuals are col-
oured by the traumatic context in which they occur.7 What is inter-
nalized as part of the self is a caregiver with terrifying intentions. 
This can generate momentary experiences of unbearable psychic 

ATTACHMENT, TRAUMA, AND PSYCHOANALYSIS   6 5
pain when the self feels attacked literally from within and almost 
overwhelmed by an experience of ‘badness’ that is impossible to 
mitigate by reassurance. Experienced in the mode of psychic equiva-
lence the feeling of badness translates directly into ‘actual badness’ 
from which, in a teleological mode of functioning, self-destruction 
might appear the only escape. In our view, this state is commonly 
the trigger for acts of self-harm and suicide, often associated with 
attachment trauma.
The only way the person can deal with such introjects is by con-
stantly externalizing these alien parts of the self-structure into a con-
tainer. Through projective identification the persecutory parts are 
experienced as outside. It is then essential that the alien experiences 
are owned by another mind, so that another mind is in control of the 
parts of the self set upon its own destruction. The need for projective 
identification is a matter of life and death for those with a traumatiz-
ing part of the self-structure, but the constellation creates a depend-
ence on the object that has many features of addiction. But we know 
that the triggering of the attachment system (by the need to have a 
proximal container for traumatized, alien parts of the self) could fur-
ther suppress mentalization. This reduces the chance of either alter-
native solutions being accepted or a non-teleological (non-physical) 
solution being found.
The following verbatim extract from a patient illustrates the expe-
rience of externalizing the alien self better than I could describe it. 
He was traumatically sexually abused by his stepfather and broth-
ers. He was now making a living as a male prostitute. ‘The more you 
experience, the more immune you become to anything. If you get 
lured into a gang of queers and then, you’re abused, you don’t fear 
queers no more. You just probably revenge against them. Cause you 
can turn your mind, into their activity and use it against them. I’m 
not getting into fights or anything like that, but I do happen to get 
into people’s heads and hurt them, do you know what I mean?’
Clinical implications
So what should be the object of psychoanalysis 
with such patients?
The traumatized individual comes to seek psychoanalytic help 
for more than simply dealing with the adversity that they have 

66  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
experienced. The devastation of psychic function that attachment 
trauma leaves in its wake impairs capacity to cope with all  the 
‘ordinary’ vicissitudes of mental life: unconscious conflicts over 
aggression; oedipal desires and defences mounted against them; nar-
cissistic vulnerabilities; conflicts in relation to ambivalently cathe-
cted objects, and so forth. All the inescapable pains of the human 
condition are experienced with the immediacy of the open wound 
unprotected by the skin provided by mentalization. While some 
of these derivatives will interact with trauma suffered, the intensity 
of the associated feelings should not mislead the analyst into think-
ing that these later conflicts are the underlying cause of the patient’s 
mental anguish. They have been amplified and prolonged by the 
patient’s difficulty in mentally processing any painful experience.
The overall aim of treatment of trauma patients is thus to help 
them to establish a more robust, mentalizing self so that they may 
mentalize trauma and conflict and develop more secure relation-
ships. Mentalizing gives a buffer between feeling and action, neces-
sary if impulses are to be caught before they become overwhelming, 
and motivations of self and other can be monitored and understood. 
Enhancing mentalization bridges the gap between affects and their 
representation, especially with current mental states. This is not 
necessarily via work on the trauma itself. Psychoanalysis fosters 
mentalization in relation to the patient’s self, not just in relation to 
his trauma. It entails finding or recovering mentalization through a 
developmentally appropriate process—finding one’s psychological 
self through the mind of a benign attachment figure.
But how should we help a patient with memories of attachment 
trauma to become more able to mentalize about these experiences?
Recovering memories of trauma
Research on memory shows that childhood memories are very 
fallible, but the gist of experience recalled is mostly accurate 
(Christianson, 1992; Heuer and Reisberg, 1992; Riccio et al. , 1994), 
particularly for traumatic events (Usher and Neisser, 1993). Although 
episodic memory does not develop until age five, children can prob-
ably encode and store many experiences that they are unable to 
describe. This does not mean though that systematic reconstruction 
of such experiences would necessarily be helpful in the treatment of 

ATTACHMENT, TRAUMA, AND PSYCHOANALYSIS   6 7
trauma. The reason for this is because trauma—in particular early 
trauma—interferes with autobiographical memory (Teicher et al. , 
1994), probably through hippocampal damage (Bremner et al. , 1993). 
In the absence of its integrative function, patients are likely to be left 
with fragmented images and emotions that they are unable to com-
bine with their life narrative or self-schema.
The frontal lobes appear to play a key role in monitoring the 
source of a memory image, including distinguishing true and false 
memories; prior expectations can create an unusually vivid set of 
ideas or images. The hyperactivation of the attachment system in 
individuals with trauma and the likely associated inhibition of men-
talizing may compromise knowing where an image has come from. 
Any pressure by a therapist to recreate and revive memories would 
be likely to introduce a further bias and inaccuracy. The therapist 
must be aware that the cognitive functions normally available to 
prevent confusion between fantasy and memory will be specifically 
compromised in traumatized individuals. Nevertheless, I believe 
that reconstruction is essential to the therapeutic process because:
 i. it provides a means to bring the patient’s mind into contact 
with what it has previously found intolerable;
 ii. it provides a place where threat to the ego and therapeutic goal 
are reasonably balanced;
 iii. it generates a coherent self-narrative assuming a historical 
continuity of self which may itself be of therapeutic value 
(Holmes, 1998; Schafer, 1980; Spence, 1994); and
 iv. most importantly, it can help in the primary task of the recovery 
of mentalization. It is this last point that I would like to illustrate 
with a clinical example.
Clinical illustration
Miss C had originally presented with a mixture of quite severe anxi-
ety and depression, and a history which included a psychotic epi-
sode and abuse from a psychotic stepfather. The abuse was severe 
enough for extensive social services involvement and a realistic risk 
of the eleven-year-old Miss C being taken into care.
The trauma was cumulative. As well as being physically, but not 
explicitly sexually, abusive, her stepfather systematically humiliated 

68  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
her. For example, she recalled having to stand by her bed at night 
reciting her homework, knowing that any mistake would be followed 
by physical punishment.
Not surprisingly, in Miss C’s analysis memories acquired great 
significance. At one level she experienced her work with me as a 
masochistic submission to a mad and cruel man, demanding that she 
remember her past in great detail no matter how painful and humili-
ating. Also unsurprising was her reaction to this submission, which 
consisted of an enraged regression into an, at times, infantile state of 
withdrawal. For days, sometimes weeks, she would not speak to me. 
She came to the appointments on time and seemed to value her time 
on the couch, but during the sessions with me made no response to 
invitations to free associate or even to answer direct questions. She 
seemed to have cut off awareness of being in the room with me.
While remembering was fraught, the present was unbearable. The 
longest periods of silence invariably followed any attempt I made to 
link the painful experiences she recalled to the current relationship 
with me. For example, she had brought a memory of a time when she 
had gone to bed hoping that her stepfather had forgotten about the 
testing that evening. She had been careful to keep especially quiet to 
make sure that she did not inadvertently draw attention to herself. 
She recalled her terror when he burst into her room some time after 
she had gone to sleep. He demanded an explanation for her daring 
to go to bed without having been tested. I gently made the interven-
tion that she was equally fearful of how I might at times act in ways 
or say things that she did not anticipate, and that being silent was 
therefore the only way that she could feel safe in the analysis. She 
acknowledged what I said with a vague shrug and said nothing for 
the rest of the session. She was also more or less totally silent at the 
session after.
With hindsight it is clear to me that she experienced my interpre-
tations in a psychic equivalence mode. Even though gently put, the 
analogy in the transference to her stepfather’s behaviour seemed to 
be an actual threat of my behaving in unpredictable ways, and an 
implicit demand on her not to move or draw attention to herself. 
The current relationship with Miss C was not an appropriate entry 
point into her inner world.
What turned out to be most useful was what seemed like direct 
work with her experiences of trauma. She found it helpful when 

ATTACHMENT, TRAUMA, AND PSYCHOANALYSIS   6 9
we talked about her terror of her stepfather; his moodiness; the 
way his gestures or facial expressions could indicate to her what to 
expect; the way the beatings felt; where her mother was and what 
she might have been thinking when the abuse occurred; her ways 
of trying to comply with his wishes; and the tricks she was proud 
of developing that she used to distract him from his wish to mal-
treat her. The remembering as it occurred in this analysis took quite 
some time—in fact most of the first year of Miss C’s treatment. 
The remembering took the place of an analysis—as classically 
described. During this time there was an increased understand-
ing of her traumatic experience but little apparent understanding 
of her. Yet the impact on her was clearly positive and, as a year 
passed, she engaged with her treatment and the difficulties with 
her work also began to ease.
I brought this case to show that our emphasis on mentalization 
is not inconsistent with reconstruction. To this day I remain uncon-
vinced about the accuracy of Miss C’s memories of abuse. I would 
recall that she had presented the same incidents in quite different 
ways at different times. The whole idea of remembering was so 
fraught, so loaded with unmetabolized affects, that I felt continually 
drawn into the abuse. Even mild questioning of her silence fixed 
me in that role. Yet my tolerance of her silence was vital, ultimately 
enabling her to speak—as she was allowed to not ‘do her home-
work’. But perhaps even more concretely, remembering allowed her 
to become able to mentalize her experiences.
She worked through the same memories, screen memories or 
real, again and again. But with each recollection she would be able 
to depict with slightly greater clarity her thoughts and feelings, and 
perhaps even more important, the putative thoughts and feelings 
of her tormenter. As she remembered what sounded like different 
accounts of the same events, I would realize that she was trying 
out different perspectives on the experience. When Miss C remem-
bered waiting in her bed, listening in terror, trying to identify her 
stepfather’s footsteps, she was not only remembering trauma but 
also making the imaginative leap of mentalization, putting herself 
into the mind of the eight-year-old girl listening to the sounds and 
remembering her constructions. When she recalled her stepfather’s 
face contorted into a Kabuki grimace of rage, the therapeutic benefit 
was from stepping behind his mask and seeing the cruelty of a man 

70  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
struggling with his own internal demons; demons who probably 
persecuted him as mercilessly as he persecuted Miss C.
The experiences changed status from static pictures of the past, 
to moving and even talking pictures where Miss C’s experience of 
herself and others was no longer either equated to the past or dis-
sociated. In retrospect it seems clear that the memories of the trauma 
for Miss C paradoxically created the safest context for the recovery 
of mentalization. The benefit is not from the recovery of memories 
or even the discovery of specific states of mind that are contained 
within them, but rather it is in rediscovering the mere fact of thought 
and feeling , the layeredness of subjective experience. Miss C came to 
describe this stage of her treatment as ‘remembering’. On one occa-
sion she added, ‘It’s not enough to remember; you’ve got to make 
remembering count.’
The role of ‘memory work’ in psychoanalysis
While reconstruction of how things actually were in childhood may 
significantly contribute to therapeutic action, this does not mean 
that the outcome of reconstruction, the remembering of hypotheti-
cal autobiographical events, is the key. It is the process of re-working 
current experiences in the context of other perspectives, that is, 
enhancing mentalization, that I believe to be curative in what we do. 
The other perspectives may be from the patient’s childhood, but they 
could be the analyst’s current experience, or the way that the patient 
is experienced by others that are close to them in the present.
Conclusion
I have suggested that the psychological consequences of trauma, in 
an attachment context and perhaps beyond, entail a decoupling of 
mentalization and a re-emergence of non-mentalizing modes of rep-
resenting internal reality. This is pernicious because the immediacy 
of a memory experienced in the non-mentalizing mode of psychic 
equivalence has the capacity to re-traumatize again and again. This 
further decouples mentalization and makes the experience ever 
more real. Trauma in the attachment context is most pernicious 
because the biological basis of attachment assumes trust. Part of 
this is the safety of not having to mentalize, of knowing that others 

ATTACHMENT, TRAUMA, AND PSYCHOANALYSIS   7 1
are thinking for us, that we need not monitor our own and others’ 
thinking. Trauma inevitably activates the attachment system. This 
activation (probably for evolutionary reasons) temporarily inhibits 
areas of the brain concerned with both remembering and mentaliza-
tion. This is why mentalization comes to be so readily abandoned in 
the face of trauma, particularly attachment trauma. Unmentalized 
trauma endures and compromises mental functioning. Of course 
it also interferes with new relationships. The self being destroyed 
from within, by identification with the aggressor, is an imperative 
for projective identification, drawing the other closer and select-
ing relationships that will retraumatize. Thus the individual loses 
a possible route to be freed from the shackles of a traumatic past, 
constantly relived. To escape from the grip of trauma, the indi-
vidual needs help to recover mentalization. Fortunately there are 
many routes to this; provided by psychoanalysis, remembering in 
the context of an enduring analytic relationship is one, but not the 
only one.
Bibliography
Alexander, R.D. (1989). ‘Evolution of the human psyche’. In: Mellars, P . 
and Stringer, C. (eds) The Human Revolution: Behavioural and Biologi-
cal Perspectives on the Origins of Modern Humans . Princeton: Princeton 
University Press. pp. 455–513.
Alexander, R.D. (1990). ‘How did humans evolve? Reflections on the 
uniquely unique species’. Museum of Zoology (Special publication no. 1) . 
Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan.
Arnsten, A.F.T. (1998). ‘The biology of being frazzled’. Science,  280: 
1,711–12.
Arnsten, A.F.T., Mathew, R., Ubriani, R., Taylor, J.R. and Li, B.-M. (1999). 
‘alpha-1 noradrenergic receptor stimulation impairs prefrontal cori-
cal cognitive function’. Biological Psychiatry,  45: 26–31.
Bartels, A. and Zeki, S. (2000). ‘The neural basis of romantic love’. Neu-
roreport,  11 (17): 3,829–34.
Bartels, A. and Zeki, S. (2004). ‘The neural correlates of maternal and 
romantic love’. Neuroimage,  21 (3): 1,155–66.
Beeghly, M. and Cicchetti, D. (1994). ‘Child maltreatment, attachment, 
and the self system: Emergence of an internal state lexicon in tod-
dlers at high social risk’. Development and Psychopathology,  6: 5–30.
Bion, W.R. (1963). Elements of Psycho-analysis . London: Heinemann.

72  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
Bloom, P . (2000). How Children Learn the Meaning of Words . Cambridge: 
MIT Press.
Bowlby, J. (1969). Attachment and Loss, Vol. 1: Attachment . London: 
Hogarth Press and the Institute of Psycho-Analysis.
Bremner, J.D., Scott, T.M., Delaney, R.C., Southwick, S.M., Mason, J.W., 
Johnson, D.R., et al. (1993). ‘Deficits in short-term memory in posttrau-
matic stress disorder’. American Journal of Psychiatry,  150: 1,015–19.
Brentano, F. (1973/1874). Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint . 
London: Routledge.
Bretherton, K. and Munholland, K.A. (1999). ‘Internal working models 
in attachment relationships: A construct revisited’. In: Cassidy, J. and 
Shaver, P .R. (eds) Handbook of Attachment: Theory, Research and Clinical 
Applications . New York: Guilford. pp. 89–114.
Christianson, S. (1992). ‘Remembering emotional events: Potential 
mechanisms’. In:
Christianson, S. (ed.) The Handbook of Emotion and Memory: Research and 
Theory . Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. pp. 307–40.
Crittenden, P .M. (1994). ‘Peering into the black box: An exploratory trea-
tise on the development of self in young children’. In: Cicchetti, D. 
and Toth, S.L. (eds) Disorders and Dysfunctions of the Self: Rochester 
Symposium on Developmental Psychopathology, Vol 5 . Rochester, NY: 
University of Rochester Press. pp. 79–148.
Dennett, D.C. (1978). ‘Beliefs about beliefs’. Behaviour and Brain Sciences,  
4: 568–570.
Flinn, M., Geary, D. and Ward, C. (2005). ‘Ecological dominance, social 
competition, and the coalitionary arms races: Why humans evolved 
extraordinary interlligence’. Evolution and Human Behavior,  26: 10–46.
Fonagy, P . (1989). ‘On tolerating mental states: Theory of mind in bor-
derline patients’. Bulletin of the Anna Freud Centre,  12: 91–115.
Fonagy, P ., Stein, H., Allen, J. and Fultz, J. (2003). The Relationship of Men-
talization and Childhood and Adolescent Adversity to Adult Functioning.  
Paper presented at the Biennial Meeting of the Society for Research 
in Child Development, Tampa, FL.
Fonagy, P . and Target, M. (1996). ‘Playing with Reality: I. Theory of 
Mind and the Normal Development of Psychic Reality’. International 
Journal of Psycho-Analysis,  77: 217–33.
Fonagy, P . and Target, M. (2000). ‘Playing with Reality III: The Persist-
ence of Dual Psychic Reality in Borderline Patients’. International 
Journal of Psychoanalysis,  81 (5): 853–74.
Freud, A. (1936). The Ego and the Mechanisms of Defence . New York: Inter-
national Universities Press.

ATTACHMENT, TRAUMA, AND PSYCHOANALYSIS   7 3
Geary, D.C. (2005). The Origin of Mind: Evolution of Brain, Cognition, 
and General Intelligence . Washington, DC: American Psychological 
Association.
Geary, D.C. and Huffman, K.J. (2002). Brain and Cognitive Evolution: 
Forms of Modularity and Functions of Mind. Psychol Bull,  128 (5): 
667–98.
Gerber, A.J. (2004). Psychodynamic Psychotherapy for Severe Personal-
ity Disorders: A Quantitative Study of Treatment Process and Outcome.  
Unpublished PhD Thesis, University of London.
Heuer, F. and Reisberg, D. (1992). Emotion, Arousal, and Memory for 
Detail. In Christianson, S. (ed) The Handbook of Emotion and Memory: 
Research and Theory . Hillsdale, NH: Erlbaum. pp. 151–80.
Hobson, R.P ., Patrick, M.P . and Valentine, J.D. (1998). ‘Objectivity in 
Psychoanalytic Judgements’. Br J Psychiatry , 173: 172–77.
Holloway, R.L. (1996). ‘Evolution of the Human Brain. In: Lock, A. and 
Peters, C.R. (eds) Handbook of Human Symbolic Evolution . New York: 
Oxford University Press. pp. 74–116.
Holmes, J. (1998). ‘Defensive and Creative Uses of Narrative in Psycho-
therapy: An Attachment Perspective’. In: Roberts, G. and Holmes, J. 
(eds) Narrative and Psychotherapy and Psychiatry . Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press. pp. 49–68.
Hopkins, J. (1992). ‘Psychoanalysis, Interpretation, and Science’. In: 
Hopkins, J. and Saville, A. (eds) Psychoanalysis, Mind and Art: Perspec-
tives on Richard Wollheim . Oxford: Blackwell. pp. 3–34.
Hrdy, S.B. (2000). Mother Nature . New York: Ballentine Books.
Insel, T. (1997). ‘A Neurobiological Basis of Social Attachment’. American 
Journal of Psychiatry,  154: 726–35.
Insel, T.R. (2003). ‘Is Social Attachment an Addictive Disorder?’ Physiol 
Behav,  79 (3): 351–57.
Jacobson, E. (1954). ‘The Self and the Object World: Vicissitudes of their 
Infantile Cathexes and their Influence on Ideational Affective Devel-
opment’. The Psychoanalytic Study of the Child,  9: 75–127.
Levine, B. (1999). ‘Self-regulation and Autonoetic Consciousness’. In: 
Tulving, E. (ed.), Memory, Consciousness and the Brain: the Talinn Con-
ference . Philadelphia: Psychology Press. pp. 200–14.
Luquet, P . (1981). ‘Le changement dans la Mentalization’. Revue Francais 
de Psychoanalyse,  45: 1,023–28.
Luquet, P . (1987). ‘Penser-Parler: Un apport psychanalytique a la the-
orie du langage’. In: Christie, R., Christie-Luterbacher, M.M. and 
Luquet, P . (eds), La Parole Troublee . Paris: Presses Universitaire de 
France. pp. 161–300.

74  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
MacLean, P . (1990). The Triune Brain in Evolution: Role in Paleocerebral 
Functions . New York: Plenum.
Marty, P . (1968). ‘A Major Process of Somatization: The Progressive Dis-
organization’. International Journal of Psycho-Analysis,  49: 246–249.
Marty, P . (1990). La Psychosomatique de l’Adulte . Paris: Presses Universi-
taire de France.
Marty, P . and De M’Uzan, M. (1963). ‘La Pens‚e Op‚ ratoire’. Revue 
Fran‡aise de Psychanalyse,  27 (Suppl.): 1,345–56.
Mayes, L.C. (2000). ‘A Developmental Perspective on the Regulation of 
Arousal States’. Seminars in Perinatology,  24: 267–79.
Miller and Cohen. (2001). In: 1905.
Nimchinsky, E.A., Gilissen, E., Allman, J.M., Perl, D.P ., Erwin, J.M. and 
Hof, P .R. (1999). ‘A Neuronal Morphologic Type Unique to Humans 
and Great Apes’. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A,  96 (9): 5,268–73.
Nitschke, J.B., Nelson, E.E., Rusch, B.D., Fox, A.S., Oakes, T.R. and 
Davidson, R.J. (2004). ‘Orbitofrontal Cortex Tracks Positive Mood in 
Mothers Viewing Pictures of their Newborn Infants’. Neuroimage,  21 
(2): 583–92.
O’Connor, T.G., Marvin, R.S., Rutter, M., Olrick, J.T. and Britner, P .A. 
(2003). ‘Child–parent Attachment Following Early Institutional Dep-
rivation’. Dev Psychopathol,  15 (1): 19–38.
Panksepp, J. (1998). Affective Neuroscience: The Foundations of Human and 
Animal Emotions . Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Perelberg, R.J. (Ed.). (1999). Psychoanalytic Understanding of Violence and 
Suicide . London: Routledge.
Riccio, D.C., Rabinowitz, V .C. and Axelrod, S. (1994). ‘Memory: When 
Less is More’. American Psychologist,  49: 917–26.
Rutter, M. and O’Connor, T.G. (2004). ‘Are there biological program-
ming effects for psychological development? Findings from a study 
of Romanian adoptees’. Dev Psychol,  40 (1): 81–94.
Schafer, R. (1980). ‘Action and narration in psychoanalysis’. New Literary 
History,  12: 61–85.
Segal, H. (1957). ‘Notes on symbol formation’. International Journal of 
Psycho-Analysis,  38: 391–97.
Semendeferi, K. and Damasio, H. (2000). ‘The brain and its main ana-
tomical subdivisions in living hominoids using magnetic resonance 
imaging’. Journal of Human Evolution,  38: 317–32.
Siegal, M. and Varley, R. (2002). ‘Neural systems involved in “theory of 
mind”’. Nat Rev Neurosci,  3 (6): 463–71.
Sohn, L. (1985). ‘Narcissistic organisation, projective identification and 
the formation of the identificate’. International Journal of Psychoanaly-
sis, 66: 201–13.

ATTACHMENT, TRAUMA, AND PSYCHOANALYSIS   7 5
Spence, D.P . (1994). ‘The special nature of psychoanalytic facts’. 
International Journal of Psycho-Analysis,  75: 915–925.
Sroufe, L.A. (1996). Emotional Development: The Organization of Emotional 
Life in the Early Years . New York: Cambridge University Press.
Target, M. and Fonagy, P . (1996). ‘Playing with Reality II: The Develop-
ment of Psychic Reality from a Theoretical Perspective’. International 
Journal of Psycho-Analysis,  77: 459–79.
Teicher, M.H., Ito, Y., Glod, C.A., Schiffer, F. and Gelbard, H.A. (1994). 
‘Early abuse, limbic system dysfunction, and borderline personality 
disorder’. In: Silk, K. R. (ed.) Biological and Neurobehavioral Studies of 
Borderline Personality Disorder . Washington, DC: American Psychiat-
ric Press. pp. 177–207.
Tulving, E. (2002). ‘Episodic memory: from mind to brain’. Annu Rev 
Psychol,  53: 1–25.
Usher, J.A. and Neisser, U. (1993). ‘Childhood amnesia and the begin-
nings of memory for four early life events’. Journal of Experimental 
Psychology: General,  122: 155–65.
Winnicott, D.W. (1956). ‘Mirror role of mother and family in child devel-
opment’. In:
Winnicott, D.W. (ed.) Playing and Reality . London: Tavistock. pp. 111–18.
Wollheim, R. (1999). On the Emotions . New Haven: Yale University 
Press.
Zilles, K., Dabringhaus, A., Geyer, S., Amunts, K., Qu, M., Schleicher, A., 
et al.  (1996). ‘Structural asymmetries in the human forebrain and the 
forebrain of non-human primates and rats’. Neurosci Biobehav Rev,  20 
(4): 593–605.



77DISCUSSION OF PETER FONAGY’S PAPER
Developmental risks and their 
sequelae: Effects on attachment 
and mentalization
Gerd Lehmkuhl
In a persuading and inspiring manner Peter Fonagy´s paper 
shows how psychoanalytic positions and perspectives can be 
innovatively defined and redeveloped. His specifications take 
on Eric Kandel´s demand to develop a shared framework for psy-
choanalysis and neurosciences in order to be able to investigate the 
effects of early mother–child interaction and the sequelae of differ-
ent attachment representations with new methodologies, such as the 
development of mentalization processes. A number of studies prove 
that experiences of separation, stress, and deprivation in early child-
hood cause insufficient affect regulation and have a negative impact 
on brain maturation and on cognitive and emotional development.
Recently, in a comprehensive review, James Swain and 
co-workers (2007) have pointed out:
‘Brain basis of early parent-infant-interactions: psychology, 
physiology and in vivo functional neuroimaging studies.’
They came to the following conclusion
The parent–infant bond, so central to the human condition, may also 
determine the risks of developing mood and anxiety disorders, and 

78  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
the potential for resiliency and protection against the development 
of psychopathology later in life, not to mention the far-reaching 
aspects of human attachment across individual behaviours and 
between cultures. Efforts to characterize this reciprocal interaction 
between caregiver and infant and to assess its impact have provided 
a powerful theoretical and empirical framework in the fields of 
social and emotional development.
This conclusion they based on a number of empirical cognitive 
neuroscientific results and raised the question of what extent a dif-
ferent attachment style of the mother has an impact on the brain 
development of their infants:
Do mothers with insecure patterns of attachment respond dif-
ferently to their infant cues? Are neglecting mothers unrespon-
sive to these cues or do they fail to receive reward signals in the 
brain? Longitudinal research designs may help in this regard. 
In addition, it will be important to clarify the role of different 
neuroendocrine pathways and different genetic variations in 
mediating parenting brain activations (280).
In their opinion, systematic studies with well characterized differ-
ent groups of parents could extensively contribute to our existing 
knowledge, especially if a number of child-stimuli parameter and 
psychometric instruments were included.
As in other areas of cognitive neuroscience, there will be debates 
regarding whether to use more ethologically sound but poorly con-
trolled stimuli versus stimuli which is less generalizable but more 
tightly controlled. Both types of experiment will be needed to tease 
apart the basic apparatus of baby responsiveness and bond forma-
tions as well as the parts of the circuit that are actually at work in 
normal day-to-day parenting. This work will also require joint study 
of parents and infants to understand how their interactions contrib-
ute to their bond and infant outcomes.
According to Ruth Feldman (2007) the concept of synchronicity 
illustrates a central approach to interpersonal and self-regulating 
functions. Micro-analysis of parent–child interaction could essen-
tially improve our understanding of pathological pathways.
Infants enter into the social world through the sensitive moment-
by-moment adaptation of an attuned and caring adult during social 

DEVELOPMENTAL RISKS AND THEIR SEQUELAE   7 9
interactions. Such interactions are adjusted to micro-shifts in infant 
affect and arousal, coalesce into patterned configurations of vocal, 
visual, and affective sequences, and organize the infant’s biological 
rhythms and attentive states into a lived experience that highlights 
the present moment. As seen, this early experience is critical for the 
development of symbol use, empathy, emotional resonance, and 
self-regulation, and lays the foundation for the child’s later capacity 
for intimacy throughout their life.
A clinical perspective conveys the results of the Mannheim 
children-at-risk study. Among other things they investigated the 
impact of mother–child interaction on the development and long-
term prognosis of children being at high or as well as those being 
at low social risk. In this regard, the results of Laucht and cowork-
ers (2004) are particularly interesting, whose study used a sample 
of babies with regulation disorders. Altogether, the mothers’ behav-
iour was less sensitive and less responsive; they smiled less at their 
child and vocalized less with their child. Furthermore, the mothers 
were more stereotypical in their interactive behaviour and less stim-
ulating. The babies, on the other side, smiled less at their mothers 
and were generally less reactive. The data analyses proved that a 
cumulation of stressors—such as a regulation disorder and nega-
tive disharmonic early interactions—later led to most psychological 
problems at ages eight and eleven.
Interestingly, the infants with regulation problems particularly 
had a negative prognosis in terms of increasing external symptoms 
during their development when the mothers behaved less reactively 
with them as babies. Dependent upon gender, controversial relation-
ships were found: whereas little reactivity in the mother caused an 
increase of external problems in girls with multiple regulation prob-
lems in the course of their development, in boys this was caused by 
a high reactivity of the mother. This indicates that in girls a progno-
sis of early childhood regulation disorders is influenced by a depriv-
ing quality to the early mother–child interactions, and in boys an 
overstimulating quality.
In the Mannheim children-at-risk-study, mostly psychosocial 
stress factors of the family, such as a low level of education or the 
psychiatric illness of a parent, were meaningful for the long-term 
prognosis of external and internal problems. On the other hand 
these results do not allow for a linear causal explanation: variables 

80  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
of the child have an impact on the early formation of the interaction 
as well as the behaviour and stressors of the mother, meaning that 
the individual Passung  (“fitting”) is essential. This can be influenced 
by genetic and physical deviations of the child as well as an insuf-
ficient sensitivity and acceptance of the baby on the mother´s side. 
The example of children with early-onset autism demonstrates that 
certain basic requirements ought to be fulfilled in order to initiate 
a successful mentalization process. So far we still have insufficient 
knowledge of the extent, and in which areas, limitations arise on 
different levels of mentalization and how this could possibly be 
improved.
We are thus so far confronted with a complex situation regard-
ing the understanding of different possible influences for better 
describing effective parenting. McLaughlin and Harrison (2006: 83) 
described this in their paper ‘Parenting Practices of Mothers of 
Children with ADHD: The Role of Maternal and Child Factors’ as 
follows:
One hundred and fifty Australian mothers of children diagnosed 
with ADHD were interviewed and asked to assess the severity of 
their child’s disruptive behaviour, their own parenting sense of com-
petence, perceptions of social isolation and parenting practices. The 
hypothesis was that severity of child disruptive behaviour, higher 
child age, ‘only’ child status, lower parental sense of competence 
and greater social isolation would be associated with the use of less 
effective parenting practices. The regression analysis indicated that 
the combination of these variables was significantly associated with 
parenting practices, accounting for 32% of the variance. Unique con-
tributions were evident for severity of overall behavioural distur-
bance and parental sense of competence.
A recent article from Bradley and Corwyn (2008: 128) could also 
prove a relationship between maternal sensitivity and behavioural 
problems in children with temperamental difficulties.
When it comes to manifesting externalizing behaviour, children 
with difficult temperaments were more affected by the kinds of 
parenting they received than children with average and easy tem-
peraments. Having opportunities for productive activity was associ-
ated with a significant reduction in externalizing behaviour problems 
for children with difficult and average temperaments, but not for 
children with easy temperaments. Likewise, it was only children 

DEVELOPMENTAL RISKS AND THEIR SEQUELAE   8 1
with difficult temperaments who showed a significant reduction 
in externalizing behaviour when they were exposed to high levels 
of maternal sensitivity and harsh parenting. In effect, the findings 
show that children with difficult temperaments are differentially 
responsive to multiple aspects of their social and physical environ-
ments as regards the development of externalizing behaviour.
Concluding the author’s dispute critically the effects of parenting 
programmes with respect to school children is summarized:
There appears to be a complex interplay between children’s tem-
peramental dispositions and their history of positive and negative 
experiences. Most programmes aimed at improving parenting prac-
tice do not appear to incorporate lessons from such a complex set 
of findings in a comprehensive or carefully targeted way, includ-
ing adequate attention to developmental changes in self-regulatory 
capacities.
Also molecular genetic studies emphasize these complex interact-
ing associations and the importance of cumulative developmental 
risks on different levels. Boys who were exposed to prenatal smok-
ing and who had a specific genetic type of the dopamine transporter 
gene (DAT1-allel) more often developed hyperactive impulsive 
behavioural patterns (Becker et al. , 2007). The occurence of hyperac-
tive behaviour based on a certain type of the DAT-transporter-gene 
on the condition of coexisting psychosocial risks proves the impor-
tance of gene-environment-interactions.
Fonagy´s and Target´s (2004) mentalization and psychosocial 
developmental model explicitly includes the results of behav-
ioural genetics and moves towards an interdisciplinary approach; 
they show an understanding of how deviations in mother–child 
interactions are only one cause of mentalization problems, and 
how a biological vulnerability, such as an attention deficit, could 
limit the reflective functioning of the child. They emphasize that 
most developmental aspects—such as biological vulnerability—
could be understood as a subtle bi-directional causation process. 
Vulnerability abets interpersonal conflicting situations and blocks 
the social, emotional, and cognitive abilities of the child. Thus on 
the one hand biological factors can constrict mentalization potential 
and, on the other, can participate in shaping an environment that 
blocks the development of a mature mentalization (Fonagy et al. , 
2004). Examplarily Fonagy and coworkers describe this in a group of 

82  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
children who are characterized by intensive dramatic affects and a 
hunger for social contact. Self-harming behaviour, inability to toler-
ate separation, hyperactivity, and temper tantrums characterize their 
early development. They fulfil the criteria of attention deficit hyper-
activity disorder; they seem anxious, depressed, irritable, and explo-
sive. Little excitement and frustrations lead to an affect storm—to 
uncontrolled emotional disruptions that are disproportionate to the 
apparent trigger. Being highly self-centred these children oscillate 
between idealization and devaluation and, according to Fonagy, are 
an extreme type of an insecurely attached infant.
Bovensiepen (2002) gives a comparable description of the clini-
cal symptoms with their possible psychodynamic backgrounds. 
As babies these children were deemed to be insecurely attached, 
fragmented, and constantly ‘on the go’. According to Pozzi (2001) 
children with hyperactive disorders exhibit preoccupied and 
desorganized attachment representations. The attachment disor-
der is considered to be the essential cause together with an early 
deficit in motherly containment. Based on the presented empiri-
cal results the dichotomy of neurobiology and psychodynamic 
causation cannot be maintained. These results and their mean-
ing, however, are interpreted and weighted quite differently. 
Leuzinger-Bohleber (2006: 46) marked this dilemma of a difficult 
dialogue between the representatives of different therapy schools 
and scientific disciplines as follows: ‘We often do not speak a com-
mon language and share our scientific and professional opinions 
only rudimentary.’
The concept of mentalization could be an approach which might 
have the potential to connect the different professions. Therefore, 
however, it would be necessary to better evaluate the concept and 
to be able to measure it. On which condition do mentalization proc-
esses change over the course of development? How are they con-
nected with the autobiographical memory? Do other risk factors exist 
beside the ones that were already mentioned? Are there protective 
conditions—as adoption studies with Rumanian orphans suggest? 
Can cognitive methods contribute to our knowledge of mentaliza-
tion processes?
Clinical experience suggests a spectrum diagnosis in reference to 
ADHD. There is a variety of different shapes of symptoms and stress 
factors, and different combinations of biological and psychosocial 

DEVELOPMENTAL RISKS AND THEIR SEQUELAE   8 3
risks. It is essential to differentiate every individual case and 
to not act on the assumption of a common genesis or a common 
psychodynamic appearance. The different etiological backgrounds 
can impact the developmental course quite differently. This is as 
well to bear in mind as the course of symptomatology itself. Often 
affected pre- and school children perceive themselves as vital, suc-
cessful, emotionally happy, and full of self-consciousness. Within just 
a short time this self-image can essentially change through learning 
and social experiences in kindergarten, in school, or in the family. 
Even though relationship experiences and early mother–child inter-
action is of essential importance for the psychodynamic understand-
ing of the genesis of hypercinetic disorders, recurring only on this 
aspect misses out other important ones. A multidimensional model 
of ADHD is supposed to correspond to a differentiated psychody-
namic conception.
Markowitsch and Welzer (2005: 12) point out that the develop-
ment of the autobiographical memory extends into early adult-
hood. The development of the autobiographical memory is based 
on a very subtle interaction of biological, psychological, social, 
and cultural processes which are interdependent. Strongly associ-
ated with the maturation of the brain the autobiographical memory 
ensures the synchronization of the individual with his or her social 
environment:
It assures that despite the elapsing time and despite the physical 
and psychological changes over the course of life we always deal 
with one and the same ego. The level of requirements and profi-
ciency rises in an increasingly sophisticated world with more and 
more long and complex chain of activities corresponding to an auto-
biographical memory as sort of relais for psychosocial synchroniza-
tion. This accounts for the prolonging duration of the education and 
development compared to former times.
Memory and mentalization evolve in a dialogue and therefore 
represent a social process that in a second step establishes meta-
representations. According to Singer (2006), this is the reason why 
we can postpone reactions to stimuli and can balance decisions. It is 
possible to establish inner models and to measure the expected suc-
cess of actions against them. In this way we succeed in careful acting, 
in preventing dangers, and in developing creativity. Forming these 
internal models can be proved via functional imaging techniques. 

84  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
So far, however, we still know too little as to how this inner process 
and these self-concepts emerge.
What are the conclusion and the overall perspective?
Child psychiatrists ought to ask themselves how neuroscientific 
results can represent the inner world of their patients, which meth-
ods can better detect the experiences, feelings, and self-concepts, 
and how early attachment experiences can effect the cognitive and 
emotional development.
And child psychoanalysts?
They should be inspired by the versatile and complex developmen-
tal models in order to reassess the importance of the environment 
for intrapsychic processes. If mentalization disorders could not only 
be caused by negative attachment experiences, but also by biologi-
cal processes, this had an important effect on treatment procedures, 
especially regarding the work with parents. Moreover, many factors 
suggest that mentalization and autobiographical memory are not 
completed at a certain point of time, but rather are part of a long course 
of development having consequences for treatment planning.
Fonagy´s concept of mentalization is a major and indispensa-
ble contribution towards a convergence of professions. I hope that 
Kandel’s (2006: 3) idea of ‘biology within the framework of psychoa-
nalysis’ results in new findings.
Bibliography
Becker, K., El-Faddagh, M., Schmidt, M.H., Esser, G. and Laucht, M. 
(2008). ‘Interaction of Dopamine Transporter Genotype with Prenatal 
Smoke Exposure on ADHD Symptoms’. J Pediatrics , 152 (2): 263–69.
Bovensiepen, G., Hopf, H. and Molitor, G. (2002, Hrsg.). Unruhige und 
unaufmerksame Kinder. Psychoanalyse des hyperkinetischen Syndroms.  
Frankfurt: Brandes & Appsel.
Bradley, R.H. and Corwyn, R.F. (2007). ‘Infant temperament, parenting, 
and externalising behaviour in first grade: a test of the differential 
susceptibility hypothesis’. J Child Psychol Psychiat , 49 (2) : 124–31.

DEVELOPMENTAL RISKS AND THEIR SEQUELAE   8 5
Feldmann, R. (2007). ‘Parent-infant synchrony and the construction of 
shared timing; physiological precursors, developmental outcomes, 
and risk conditions’. J Child Psychol Psychiat , 48 (3/4) : 329–54.
Fonagy, P . (2008). Bindung, Trauma und Psychoanalyse: Wo Psychoanalyse 
auf Neurowissenschaften trifft.  Frankfurt: Joseph Sandler Research 
Conference.
Fonagy, P ., Gergely, G., Jurist, E.L. and Target, M. (2004). Affektregulierung, 
Mentalisierung und die Entwicklung des Selbst.  Stuttgart: Klett-Cotta.
Kandel, E.R. (2006). Psychiatrie, Psychoanalyse und die neue Biologie des 
Geistes.  Frankfurt: Suhrkamp.
Laucht, M., Schmidt, M.G. and Esser, G. (2004). Frühkindliche Regula-
tionsprobleme: Vorläufer von Verhaltensauffälligkeiten des späteren Kinde-
salters?  In: Papousek, M., Schieche, M., and Wurmser, H. (Hrsg.): 
Regulationsstörungen der frühen Kindheit . Huber, Bern. S. 339–56.
Leuzinger-Bohleber, M. (2006). Persönlichkeitsstörungen und Depres-
sion. Schulenübergreifende Dialoge und Kontroversen . In: Springer, A., 
Gerlach, A. and Schlösser, A.-M. (Hrsg.). Störungen der Persönlichkeit . 
Gießen: Psychosozial-Verlag. S. 15–52.
Markowitsch, H.J. and Welzer, H. (2005). Das Autobiographische 
Gedächtnis. Hirnorganische Grundlagen und Biosoziale Entwicklung.  
Stuttgart: Klett-Cotta.
McLaughlin, D.P . and Harrison, Ch.A. (2006). Parenting Practices of 
Mothers of Children with ADHD: The Role of Maternal and Child 
Factors. Child and Adolescent Mental Health , 11 (2): 82–89.
Pozzi, M.E. (2001). ‘Ritalin für wen? Wie können wir das Bedürfnis 
nach Ritalin in der psychodynamischen Beratung von Familien mit 
Kindern unter fünf Jahren verstehen?’ Analytische Kinder—und Jugen-
dlichenpsychotherapie , Heft, 112 (32): 519–41.
Singer, W. (2006). Vom Gehirn zum Bewusstsein . Frankfurt: Suhrkamp.
Swain, J.E., Lorberbaum, J.P ., Kose, S. and Strathearn, L. (2007). ‘Brain 
basis of early parent-infant-interactions: psychology, physiology and 
in vivo functional neuroimaging studies’. J Child Psychol Psychiat , 48 
(3/4): 262–87.



87DISCUSSION OF PETER FONAGY’S PAPER
Attachment, trauma, 
and psychoanalysis: Where 
psychoanalysis meets neuroscience
Björn Salomonsson
Commentary on Peter Fonagy’s paper including 
some personal remarks
Before discussing some points of your rich and challenging paper, 
I would like to sketch the background of our cooperation. I met you 
as a student in 2004, at the Research Training Programme-course in 
London, initiated by the International Psychoanalytic Association, 
where Linda Mayes and you directed the course. During that prolific 
week, you kindly invited me to link my research project on infants 
and mothers in Stockholm with your Parent Infant Psychotherapy 
project at the Anna Freud centre in London. Since then, I have been 
working with your research psychologist, Michelle Sleed. You have 
been enormously helpful and welcoming; from providing ideas 
about design, statistics, and the structure of our paper to lending me 
your collapsible bike. Thus, profiting from your vast knowledge and 
generosity has been a real treat, and you have taught me many and 
valuable things.
This is our common ground as researchers. As analysts, our 
backgrounds are more divergent. Your writings are influenced by 
an Anna-Freudian terminology and mode of thinking, to which 

88  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
you add from many other fields of your expert knowledge, such as 
developmental psychology, attachment theory, and neuroscience. 
I, on my part, am a psychoanalyst who tends to understand clinical 
processes in Post-Kleinian object relational terms, but who is also 
influenced by intersubjectivist and French semiotic thinkers. To this 
is added my psychoanalytic experience with infants and mothers 
according to Norman (2001, 2004).
My discussion tonight comes from the vantage point of a psycho-
analyst at work. I will focus on how you use the attachment concept 
to substantiate your perceptions in research and psychoanalytic set-
tings, alternately. As you demonstrate, attachment is a valid concept 
in systematic research. However, is it a valid psychoanalytic  concept? 
That is my question. My hesitation does not diminish my fascination 
with the neuroscientific  perspectives that you open up, for example, 
via the work of Bartels and Zeki. The fact that the same brain areas 
are activated in romantic and maternal love and that in both cases, 
there is a suppression of ‘critical social assessment of other people 
and with negative emotions’ (Bartels, 2004: 1,164) is indeed thrilling. 
You substantiate this, both with the everyday observation that ‘love 
is blind’, and with the neurochemistry findings of the activation of 
oxytocin circuits during these psychological processes. As we know, 
in several mammalian species oxytocin stimulates maternal behav-
iour and bonding to the offspring. Here, we learn that it is also acti-
vated in romantic love.
Now, let me have a psychoanalytic  look at the relations between 
two romantic lovers, and mother and infant, respectively. Childcare, 
says Freud (1905: 223), offers the child unending sexual excitation 
because his mother regards him with feelings ‘derived from her 
own sexual life: she strokes him, kisses him, rocks him and quite 
clearly treats him as a substitute for a complete sexual object’. Jean 
Laplanche (1997: 661) depicts a ‘primary seduction’ by which the 
mother transmits her ‘enigmatic message’ to the child, who thereby 
gets flooded with her unconscious desire, a desire which he, how-
ever, cannot comprehend. These psychoanalytic ideas parallel the 
fMRI-findings of Bartels and Zeki (2004); the glimmering eyes of the 
amorous couple and of the mother–baby dyad are not as far apart 
as our morality would prefer them to be, whether we locate this 
proximity by the psychoanalytic term ‘the Unconscious’ or by the 
neurological term ‘the brain’. Similarly, the synaptic suppression of 

ATTACHMENT, TRAUMA, AND PSYCHOANALYSIS   8 9
critical judgement according to Bartels and Zeki finds a counterpart 
in, in Meltzer’s (1988: 8) words, that ‘the percentage of “beautiful” 
mothers recorded in the course of psycho-analysis far exceeds the 
national average and that this appellation clearly refers back to 
childhood impressions’.
I deliberately said that the psychoanalytic formulations by Freud 
and so on paralleled , not supported  or substantiated , Bartels’s and 
Zeki’s fMRI-findings. These researchers aim to find out ‘what the 
two types of attachment [maternal and romantic love] have in com-
mon in neural terms’ (p. 1155). I, however, see problems in linking 
concepts from three different fields of knowledge, that is, psychoa-
nalysis, neuroscience, and attachment theory, in order to make one 
field support the other. Researchers need to correlate data with oper-
ationalized entities, and attachment is one such entity. However, for-
mulating experiences within a psychoanalytic framework implies 
saying something else, for example, that the roots of a mother’s love 
reach down into her unconscious desire. Such formulations have 
clinical implications. For instance, a mother might have conflicts 
around nursing because it unconsciously signifies to her forbidden 
desire or aggression. This might influence the baby who gets fussy 
at the breast. Whether you agree with such an interpretation or not, 
you probably agree that it is psychoanalytic; it claims that both part-
ners are involved in unconscious and conflictual emotions and inter-
actions. But is this the same as stating that the baby suffers from an 
attachment disturbance? If so, I fear that attachment becomes a con-
cept wide enough to cover anything similar to ‘human relations’.
Let me exemplify my argument with your moving accounts of 
James and Stuart, two men in despair. You link their childhood 
victimizations with their eruptive violence and inability to speak 
of their own feelings and understand those of others. You describe 
Stuart’s present behaviour as ‘the effects of his attachment trauma 
on his adult personality’. These men suffered trauma, for sure, but 
what does ‘attachment trauma’ imply? Traumatized early object 
relations? I could think of many characters that also suffered an 
‘attachment trauma’, but who showed very different pictures. To 
sketch some examples; in Wagner’s opera Tristan and Isolde , Tristan 
lets life’s bright prospects be devastated by his infatuation with 
his foster father’s wife Isolde. Consequent on his adultery, Tristan 
is deadly wounded. In the end, he lies waiting for Isolde to return 

90  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
and deliver him through death. In an act of impressive self-analysis, 
Tristan realizes that his infatuation with Isolde resulted from his 
lifelong and impossible yearning for the parents he lost at birth. He 
is possessed by an internal tune: die alte Weise sagt mir’s wieder: mich 
sehnen—und sterben . That is, ‘The ancient tune tells me once more: to 
desire—and die.’ At birth, Tristan was taken care of by his mother’s 
brother, the King, himself a widower. He grew up surrounded by 
death, and this was his trauma. As I have understood your use of 
the concept of attachment trauma, Tristan’s case seems to belong to 
this category.
Looking for a case of a directly observed baby, I choose Benny, a 
boy two months of age. When his mother offers him the breast, he 
turns his head away and starts screaming. The closer he gets to the 
nipple, the more he pushes it away. The mother gets desperate. When 
I speak with Benny, in mother–infant psychoanalytic treatment, he 
follows me attentively. However, when he moves his gaze towards 
Mum, he follows me attentively with his eyes. She feels hurt and jeal-
ous, and tells me that by his third week of life the health visitor had 
told her that he hadn’t gained enough weight. ‘I felt like a no-good 
mother!’ Since then, he has been refusing the nipple. Once again, 
I assume you would agree that this is a case of attachment trauma.
Tristan lost his parents at birth and was brought up by his uncle. 
He became a gentle and courageous, unhappy, and yearning 
young man. His mentalizing capacities seemed well developed, 
as witnessed by his empathy with his foster father’s pain due 
to his own treachery. Benny’s mother relation is clouded by her 
anxiety and his ambivalence at approaching her nipple. He alter-
nates between contentment and fussiness. James and Stuart are 
brought up in violence and humiliation. Today, they are jail-birds, 
always on the alert to assault or be assaulted. All these cases con-
tain many more and unmentioned factors, but to say that they all 
suffered early object relational trauma is to state their obvious and 
lowest common denominator. One could also name them ‘attach-
ment trauma’ but I would ask you to clarify what new substance, 
from a psychoanalytic perspective, such a formulation adds. As a 
researcher, I see the value of an operationalized concept, like the 
one of attachment. As a clinician clothing my experiences in psy-
choanalytic terms, I find the concept too inclusive and not specific 
enough.

ATTACHMENT, TRAUMA, AND PSYCHOANALYSIS   9 1
Thus, as a researcher, I sympathize with your conclusions, and 
as a psychoanalyst I am more prone to disagree. I will illustrate fur-
ther from your analysis with Miss C. Ralph Greenson (1968) once 
wrote about the analyst’s daily mistakes. Whereas he made mistakes 
everyday and openly discussed them, he wondered why colleagues 
were so reluctant to discuss them. Obviously, you would agree with 
Greenson’s approach; you question your transference interpreta-
tions, like when you told Miss C that she feared that you, like her 
stepfather, might do or say things that she did not anticipate. When 
you shifted into empathically conveying how badly the stepfather 
had treated her, you got a better contact with her.
I, you, and all psychoanalysts, make mistakes every day, whatever 
theory we rely on. We get overwhelmed by the patient’s demand 
to join in their story. In Joseph Sandler’s (1993) words, through our 
‘role-responsiveness’ we comply with a script that the patient pushes 
on to us. Or, to use Racker’s (1957) terms, we concord or comple-
ment with these identifications. We become directive or defensive, 
and we rush into or avoid transference interpretations. We fear not 
to understand our patients, and we try to outsmart them. We get 
enmeshed in their projections and become confused, aroused, indif-
ferent, tired …
In short, our own unconscious plays tricks on us and colours our 
counter-transference. In such situations, we might try to drive home 
an interpretation, although we might feel that we ‘gently made the 
intervention that she was equally fearful of how I might at times 
act in ways or say things that she did not anticipate’, as you told 
Miss C, and as I, too, might have told her. Obviously, we all make 
mistakes. But can we step back and get a look at what is going 
on? That is the psychoanalytic challenge, that of scrutinizing our 
counter-transference and trying to understand whom the patient 
experiences us to be.
Therefore, as you see, I have no reason to argue about your 
handling of Miss C. My perspective is rather how you use attach-
ment theory to substantiate your technical changes. You rely on the 
concept of mentalization (Allen and Fonagy, 2006) to advocate a 
renewal of technique for certain mental disturbances; not until you 
have helped the patient mentalizing is it meaningful and helpful to 
interpret what they fear and wish, whether in the transference or 
with other people. The analyst should first monitor the traumatized 

92  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
patient’s ‘readiness to hear comments about thoughts and feelings’, 
as you put it. I completely agree. You state that ‘the clinical prior-
ity has to be to reduce arousal so that the patient can again think of 
other perspectives (mentalize)’. I agree with this perspective, too, 
and I would like to remind all of us that this has been part of good 
psychoanalytic technique since the arrival of ego-psychology.
However, let us not underestimate the conflictual aspect of men-
talization. Suppose you had your interviewee Stuart in psychoanal-
ysis instead. Just like in the interview he would tell you, his analyst, 
‘I am not a danger to anyone, I am a danger to myself, not other 
people,’ or ‘I grabbed a hold of her [mum] by the hair, like, and I was 
banging her head off. The police had to get me off her.’ Stuart might 
seem  unable to understand that his words affected you. However, as 
analysis proceeded you might discover that his inability was only 
half the story. He might also find it excruciating to think of you as 
a fellow with feelings, or as someone who is able to think and talk 
with an adversary instead of just punching his jaw. Such insights can 
be so painful as to numb his thinking capacities, which could appear 
like an inability to mentalize. This is not to say that I recommend such 
notions to be thrown into his face as premature interpretations.
Conclusion
To sum up; the title of your paper is ‘Attachment, trauma and psy-
choanalysis: where psychoanalysis meets neuroscience’. The gist of 
my argument is this: before we find out where psychoanalysis could 
meet neuroscience, let us discuss in depth where attachment theory 
meets psychoanalytic theory. There might be several meeting points 
but, just like Siegfried Zepf (2006) wrote recently, the topic merits an 
investigation. I look forward to hearing your points of view, both 
now and in our future meetings at the Anna Freud Centre.
Notes
 1. French psychoanalysts developed a notion of mentalization largely 
formulated from the economic point of view. Pierre Marty dis-
cussed mentalization as a protective buffer in the preconscious 
system which prevents progressive disorganization (Marty, 1968). 
He considers mentalization as connecting drive excitations and 

ATTACHMENT, TRAUMA, AND PSYCHOANALYSIS   9 3
mental representations and thereby creating both ‘fluidity’ and 
‘constancy’ (Marty, 1990, 1991). Mentalization ensures freedom in 
the use of associations as well as ensuring permanence and stability. 
At the same time, Pierre Luquet (1981, 1988) discussed the develop-
ment of different forms of thinking and the reorganization of inner 
experience alongside this development. In his chapter on a theory 
of language (Luquet, 1987) he distinguished primary mentaliza-
tion (which we would consider the absence of RF) with secondary 
symbolic mentalization. While this form of mentalization was still 
seen as closely connected to sensory data and primary unconscious 
fantasies it was nevertheless also seen as representative of these 
processes and observable in dreams, art, and play. His third level 
was verbal thought, which he considered most distant from bod-
ily processes. Similar ideas were proposed by André Green (1975), 
Hanna Segal (1957), and Joyce McDougall (1978), and more recently 
by Frosch (1995), Busch (1995), and Auerbach (1993; Auerbach and 
Blatt, 1996).
 2. Incidentally, the statistical analysis of the results of these treat-
ments was recently completed and underscored the effectiveness 
of the psychoanalytic approach. In this sample of young adult 
personality-disordered subjects who were sequentially assigned to 
psychoanalysis and psychodynamic psychotherapy, 63% improved 
significantly on a very conservative composite measure of psychiat-
ric diagnosis, depression, and anxiety. Eighty-three per cent of those 
who were treated with psychoanalysis, in opposition to just 29% of 
those treated in psychotherapy, showed these improvements. Only 
9% of subjects in psychoanalysis for whom post-termination follow-
up data were available did not maintain the gains of treatment.
 3. These are normally negotiated, dynamic, multilevel kinship 
groups.
 4. The more cognitively, socially, and behaviourally sophisticated indi-
viduals are able to outmanoeuvre and manipulate other individuals 
to gain control of resources and to gain control of the behaviour of 
other people. But why such (in evolutionary terms) rapid devel-
opment? Most evolutionary adaptations have a downside which 
makes them self-limiting (for example, an increase in the size of a 
reindeer’s antlers will help in combating other males but only up 
to a point after which the laws of  physics make it an obstruction 
and a handicap). There is no such constraint on social intelligence 
other than the possibility of totally destroying our ecology (Flinn 
et al. , 2005). The increasing coherence and organization of hominid 
groups and the ever more sophisticated cognitive capacities that 

94  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
underpin these bring increasing ecological advantages rather than 
costs. A virtuous cycle was created of ever increasing ecological 
dominance and ever higher social intelligence and social complex-
ity. Linguistic and social cognitive capacities were favoured because 
they enabled our ancestors to anticipate and influence social interac-
tions with other increasingly intelligent humans.
 5. Children develop a malleable system that enables them to adapt to 
the particular mental structures that have evolved within a cultural 
group as specific adaptations to that environment (Bloom, 2000).
 6. It is linked to the mesocorticolimbic dopaminergic reward circuit 
which also plays a key role in mediating the process of physical (as 
well as emotional) addiction (Insel, 1997; MacLean, 1990; Panksepp, 
1998). It is highly unlikely that nature created a brain system spe-
cifically to subserve cocaine and alcohol abuse. It is more likely 
that addictions are the accidental byproduct of the activation of a 
biological system that underpins the crucial evolutionary function 
of attachment (Insel, 1997; MacLean, 1990; Panksepp, 1998). Attach-
ment, then, is an ‘addictive disorder’ (Insel, 2003).
 7. Thus trauma contributes to the foregrounding of self-fragmentation 
(identity diffusion) because traumatized individuals can make use of 
discontinuities within the self to adapt to incomprehensible assault 
from someone connected to them by attachment bonds by ‘identi-
fying with the aggressor’ (Freud, 1936). One individual, who had 
been sexually abused as a child and was in prison for rape, vividly 
described how this happens in answering a question about how his 
childhood experiences had affected his adult personality: ‘I don’t 
think none of its been a setback I think its all been everything has 
been more positive because its just like lets take, lets take slavery 
for example errm not from a racist point of view but from a realistic 
point of view you take a man and you make him work for you, you 
feed him what you don’t want to eat you put him in places you 
wouldn’t want your dog to live but yet still he makes that home his 
castle he makes gourmet meals out of your trash one mans trash is 
another mans treasure one man’s nightmare is another man’s pleas-
ure see and when you have a situation and you know that you are 
not going to get out of it well you start feeling good in it quicker 
than you can imagine.’
Bibliography
Allen, J. and Fonagy, P . (2006). Handbook of Mentalization-Based Treatment . 
Chichester: John Wiley & Sons.

ATTACHMENT, TRAUMA, AND PSYCHOANALYSIS   9 5
Bartels, A. and Zeki, S. (2004). ‘The neural correlates of maternal and 
romantic love’. NeuroImage.  21: 1,155–66.
Freud, S. (1905). Three Essays on Sexuality. S.E 7 .
Greenson, R. (1968). ‘The Use of Dream Sequences for Detecting Errors 
of Technique’. In: (1978) Explorations in Psychoanalysis . New York: 
International Universities Press.
Laplanche, J. (1997). ‘The theory of seduction and the problem of the 
Other’. Int. J. Psychoanal. , 78: 653–66.
Meltzer, D. (1988). The Apprehension of Beauty.  Perthshire: Clunie Press.
Norman, J. (2001). ‘The psychoanalyst and the baby: a new look at work 
with infants’. Int. J. Psychoanal. , 82 (1): 83–100.
Norman, J. (2004). ‘Transformations of early experiences’. Int. J. Psycho-
anal., 85: 1,103–22.
Racker, H. (1957). ‘The Meanings and Uses of Counter-transference’. 
Psychoanal. Quart . 26: 303–57.
Sandler, J. (1993). ‘On communication from patient to analyst: Not every-
thing is projective identification’ . Int. J. Psychoanal ., 74: 1,097–1,107.
Zepf, S. (2006). ‘Attachment theory and psychoanalysis: some remarks 
from an epistemological and from a Freudian viewpoint’. Int. J. Psy-
choanal ., 87: 1,529–48.



97CHAPTER THREE
Coping with children’s temperament
William B. Carey, M.D.
Introduction
The main focus of this volume is ‘Early Development and its 
Disturbances’ with special emphasis on the ‘psychoanalytic perspec-
tive on the development of Attention deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder 
(ADHD) and other psychopathologies’. My assignment is to discuss 
‘Coping with Children’s Temperament’ (Carey and McDevitt, 1995) 
as part of this complicated area. The main observation I would like 
to make is this: the current neglect of normal temperament differ-
ences has resulted in an overdiagnosis of CNS-based (central nerv-
ous system based) psychopathology and an overuse of medication. 
I shall propose that we must do better at recognizing children’s tem-
peraments and other normal behaviours and must help parents to 
cope with them appropriately rather than ignoring or pathologizing 
them.

98  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
Current status of overdiagnosis of ADHD, bipolar disorder, 
and other psychopathologies
In the USA estimates of the use of psychotropic medications indicate 
that 5–10% of our children are being so treated. In some areas the 
rate is greater than this and in some it is less. Several years ago a 
survey in three schools in Norfolk, Virginia, found that 17% of the 
students were diagnosed with ADHD and were being given stimu-
lants. The highest rate in my personal acquaintance was two years 
ago in a prestigious private school for normal wealthy children not 
far from where I live, where the rate was an astonishing 35%. The 
USA remains the largest producer and consumer of Ritalin® (and 
similar products), accounting for 80% of the usage in the world.
There appear to be several important factors contributing to this 
alarming situation. My intention is to emphasize two of them. One 
is the general professional and public unfamiliarity with our grow-
ing knowledge about normal temperament differences. My other 
principal concern is with the faulty mental health diagnostic system 
presently available to us, which makes it easy for normal children to 
be overdiagnosed. Other factors include the faulty application of the 
system by practitioners.
Temperament differences in children
The term ‘temperament’ describes the largely inborn normal differ-
ences in behavioural style that make a major contribution to a child’s 
normal daily behaviour. However, temperament differences can 
contribute to judgements of psychopathology when there is a poor 
fit between them and the environment and when the traits them-
selves are misinterpreted as abnormal.
Definition
The most concise definition of temperament is as ‘behavioural 
style’ or the characteristic way with which the child experiences 
and responds to environmental stimuli. It is the ‘how’ of behaviour 
rather than the ‘what’ (the abilities) or the ‘why’ (the adjustment 
or motivations). The term is used loosely with varying meanings 
in general speech and in the non-professional literature with such 
designations as the judicial or artistic temperament, but these terms 

COPING WITH CHILDREN’S TEMPERAMENT   9 9
probably refer more to other aspects of the overall personality than 
specifically to the reaction style.
History
The term ‘temperament’ is not a recent invention. The ancient Greeks 
and Romans, particularly Galen, developed the humoral theory of 
health and temperament. Their view was that the variable mixture in 
the individual of blood, yellow bile, black bile, and phlegm determined 
whether one would be sanguine, choleric, melancholic, or phlegmatic. 
Despite the complete lack of scientific evidence for this theory, it dom-
inated thinking in European culture until the 19th century.
The psychology of the early 20th century shifted to the opposite 
extreme of emphasizing the dominant importance of the environ-
ment. Yet, a few prominent physicians generated theories of temper-
ament as mediating between the individual and the setting: Sigmund 
Freud (1856–1939) had offered the observation that ‘each individual 
ego is endowed from the beginning with its own peculiar dispo-
sitions and tendencies’ (Freud, 1950). Ivan Pavlov (1849–1936), the 
Russian physiologist, not only taught us about conditioning but also 
developed a theory of normal nervous system types. Arnold Gesell 
(1880–1961) in New Haven, Connecticut, in addition to establishing 
the earliest tables of normal developmental milestones, described 
alpha, beta, and gamma temperamental types. The theories of these 
three and a few others were paid little attention then because they 
were ahead of their times.
Not until 1956 was a well constructed clinical investigation of 
temperament launched by Alexander Thomas, Stella Chess, and 
associates in the New York Longitudinal Study. They were the real 
pioneers who deserve the credit for having scientifically demon-
strated the nature and clinical significance of these largely innate 
behavioural style traits. This was a major turning point in psycho-
logical theory. Both before and since then several developmental psy-
chologists have proposed different sets of traits. However, because 
these alternative attempts have been derived more from computer 
analysis of selected data than from actual clinical observations, they 
have been less valuable for clinical work and are used almost exclu-
sively for research (Chess and Thomas, 1984; Thomas, Chess, and 
Birch, 1968).

100  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
Traits and clusters
On the basis of discussions with parents and from their own 
observations, Thomas and Chess identified nine normal traits that 
they believed would predispose some children to being more likely 
to develop reactive behaviour problems in the first dozen years 
of life (see Table 1). These traits are: activity; rhythmicity/predict-
ability; approach/withdrawal (the initial response to novelty or 
challenge); adaptability/flexibility; intensity (the usual amount of 
energy of responses, whether positive or negative); mood (the typi-
cal amount of friendly and positive reactions observed, as opposed 
to unfriendly and negative ones); persistence and attention span; 
distractibility; and sensory threshold/sensitivity. The New York 
group proposed that these traits themselves are all normal whether 
Table 1. The nine NYLS dimensions of temperament.
1.  Activity: The amount of physical motion during sleep eating play dress-
ing bathing and so forth.
 a)  Rhythmicity: The regularity of physiologic functions such as 
hunger sleep and elimination.
 b)  Approach/withdrawal: The nature of initial responses to new 
stimuli such as people, situations, places, foods, toys, and 
procedures.
 c)  Adaptability: The ease or difficulty with which reactions 
to stimuli can be modified in a desired way. Flexibility.
 d)  Intensity: The energy level of responses, regardless of quality 
or direction.
 e)  Mood: The amount of pleasant and friendly or unpleasant 
and unfriendly behaviour in various situations (overt 
behaviour; not assumed internal feelings).
 f)  Persistence/attention span: The length of time that particular 
activities are pursued by the child, with or without obstacles.
 g)  Distractibility: The effectiveness of extraneous stimuli 
in interfering with on-going behaviours.
 h)  Sensory threshold: The amount of stimulation, such as sounds 
or light, necessary to evoke discernable responses in the child.
(Adapted from Thomas and Chess, 1977).

COPING WITH CHILDREN’S TEMPERAMENT   101
high or low, but the possibility of abnormality at the far extremes 
remained to be clarified.
These nine traits formed three clusters used for research purposes. 
The ‘difficult’ children were low in approach, adaptability, mood, 
and regularity, and conversely high in intensity. ‘Easy’ children 
showed the opposite. The ‘slow-to-warm-up’ children were like the 
difficult ones but were less intense, that is, they were essentially shy 
children. Their research project, which began in 1956 with 133 New 
York children, demonstrated that difficult and stwu children were 
much more likely than easy ones to develop reactive behaviour 
problems in the first 12 years.
Goodness or poorness of fit
However, it soon became apparent that there were no traits that were 
always conducive to problems or always conducive to satisfactory 
emotional and behavioural health. What mattered most of all was the 
‘goodness or poorness of the fit’ between the traits presented by the 
child and the expectations and values of the parents or other caregiv-
ers. The compatibility or discord between them led to harmonious or 
stressful interactions and thus to healthy function or dysfunction in the 
child. For example, the inflexible and negative child might be at par-
ticular risk of a difficult adult interaction but equally important would 
be the understanding, tolerance, and management skills of the adult.
We must recognize that the child’s temperament can actually 
change the impact of the environment:
1. by being more sensitive to some aspects of it than others
 i. by selecting different aspects of it with which to engage and 
react; and
 ii. by actually evoking changes in it.
Poor fit is not necessarily a sign of psychopathology but is often 
treated as such.
Origins and stability
Evidence from twin and adoption studies tells us that these tem-
perament traits are about 50% genetically determined. The rest come 
from pre-, peri-, and post-natal non-genetic physical factors and from 

102  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
the psychosocial environment. Stability is small at first but increases 
with age, at least up until adolescence. However, temperament traits 
are never completely fixed or completely changeable.
Assessment
The New York group employed long and detailed interviews to 
obtain descriptions of the characteristics of their subjects. This proc-
ess was too cumbersome for further applications. With a group of 
developmental psychologists, especially Sean McDevitt, I developed 
a series of five different parent questionnaires for ages one month 
through twelve years to facilitate the collection and rating of the same 
data content for research or consultative purposes. They can be com-
pleted by the parent in 20 to 30 minutes and scored by the staff of the 
professional person in about 10 minutes. A computer scoring system 
is even faster. For routine use by primary care paediatricians I have 
recommended the use of abbreviated interviewing when there is 
some concern but questionnaires for more complicated cases. Direct 
observation of the child can also help to complete the assessment.
Practical importance
The impact of the child’s temperament on the parents, teachers, 
and others involved, and on the child his or herself, is great. The 
child’s behavioural style influences how the caregivers feel about 
themselves and how they go about their parenting practices. The 
effects on the children are even greater:
 i. physical: predisposing to certain problems such as accidents 
and child abuse, and affecting others, such as when greater 
attention is paid to the irritable, sick child;
 ii. developmental: some modification of the timing and ease of 
achievement of walking, toilet training, acquisition of expressive 
language, and so forth;
 iii. social behavioural adjustment: as demonstrated by Thomas 
and Chess;
 iv. school performance: to be discussed shortly (see Keogh, 2003);
 v. various other aspects of adjustment: such as self-regulation, 
emotional state, and coping skills; and
 vi. symptoms of physical function such as disruptions to eating, 
sleeping, and elimination. (Table 2)

COPING WITH CHILDREN’S TEMPERAMENT   103
Table 2. BASICS profile of behavioural adjustment.
Area of behavioural adjustment emotions Concerns: behaviour, emotions, 
 functions
Behaviour competence in social 
 relationships. Attachment. Skills, 
 success, caring cooperation, 
 involvement, reliance. Parents, 
 siblings, peers, teachers, other 
adults.Undersocialization: aggres-
sion, opposition, 
withdrawal.
Achievements: task performance 
 and mastery in school, home, 
 community. High or sufficient 
 achievement, effort, motivation, 
 and satisfactionPoor achievement or failure. 
 Excessive preoccupation 
 with work or play.
Self-relations. Self-assurance. Self-
 esteem about academics, social 
 worth, appearance, physical 
abilities. Self-care, good health and 
safety attitudes, practices, handling 
 personal stress. Self-control 
 or regulation, actions, feelings.Poor self-esteem. Poor body 
 image.
Self-neglect, risk taking. 
 Overconcern for oneself.
Over-control inhibition 
 or under-control 
 impulsivity.
Internal status: feeling 
 and thinking. Reasonable 
 contentment. Thought clarity.Anxiety. Depression. 
 Thought disturbance 
 (for example, obsessions).
Coping or problem-solving patterns. 
 Direct and appropriate engagement. 
 Identifies problems; plans solutions; 
 works on solutions; persists 
 at solutions; revises solutions; 
 gets help for solutions.Ineffective, maladaptive 
 problem solving with 
 excessive use of denial, 
 avoidance or repression.
Symptoms of physical function. 
 Comfortable function.Moderate to severe symptoms 
in eating, sleeping elimina-
tion gender unexplained 
physical complaints, repeti-
tive behaviours.
 Adapted from: Carey, W.B. (in press).

104  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
The matter of the probable role of temperament in attachment has 
been investigated but has been resisted by some who believe that 
parental care is the entire explanation for the outcome. However, 
a recent review of genetic factors in attachment seems to support 
a contribution from the child, which is likely to be temperament 
(Bakermans-Kranenburg and van Jzendoorn, 2007).
Management
When the parental concern is simply about an annoying tempera-
ment trait in a child who is not dysfunctional, the best strategy for 
the clinician is to recognize the traits as temperament and not dys-
function and to:
 i. revise the caregiver’s understanding and handling to improve 
the fit:
 ii. suggest relief for the caregivers when necessary by environ-
mental intervention; and
 iii. refer to a mental health specialist for this concern only if there 
are complex reactive problems.
The most effective parent counselling has proven to be to help them 
to understand the nature of the specific temperament traits, to aid 
them in tolerating them better, and to manage them more skillfully 
with accommodation rather than with punitive discipline, psycho-
therapy, or medication.
Current status of knowledge and research
Before taking up a more detailed review of the impact of tempera-
ment on social adjustment and school performance, presented here 
are a few general thoughts about the current status of temperament 
research and diffusion of the information to the professions and to the 
general public. For 50 years convincing evidence has been accumu-
lating that temperament exists, that it matters greatly clinically, and 
that the appropriate management is different from that of behaviour 
problems (Carey and McDevitt, 1995). Yet, the subject is not even 
mentioned in about half of the textbooks for child health profession-
als or in popular advice books for parents. Current research is being 

COPING WITH CHILDREN’S TEMPERAMENT   105
done almost entirely by academic developmental psychologists, 
who apparently are more interested in theoretical issues such as fac-
tor structures and predictions than in helping children and their par-
ents deal with their concerns right now.
Relationship of temperament to ADHD 
and other psychopathology
Having described briefly what we know about temperament, the dis-
cussion focuses now in greater detail on what the relationship seems 
to be between it and psychopathology and in particular ADHD.
The current Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM-IV-TR APA 
2000) criteria for the ADHD diagnosis are familiar: 6/9 inattention 
symptoms or 6/9 hyperactivity-impulsivity symptoms (‘that is 
maladaptive and inconsistent with developmental level’) for at least 
six months with some starting before seven years, with impairment 
in at least two settings, and not due to some other cause.
The neurological explanation
The DSM does not say so explicitly but virtually all users assume 
that this is a ‘neurodevelopmental disorder’, and that some degree 
of intrinsic cerebral malfunction is present (Barkley, 1998). Stimu-
lants and other drugs are widely recommended as a requirement 
to repair a supposedly defective nervous system and psychosocial 
treatments are widely neglected.
Psychological interpretations
The psychoanalytic view of ADHD, as I understand it, is that a deficiency 
of early relationships has failed to ‘provide the child with sufficiently 
stable supporting ego functions’ or has resulted in insufficient inter-
nalization of impulse controls. Early emotional trauma may have been 
involved. Preferred treatment is a ‘corrective emotional experience’ 
(Leuzinger-Bohleber, Fischmann and Laezar, 2008; Sugarman, 2006).
Role of temperament
Both the neurological and psychological explanations have some 
empirical support, more for the latter. However, we must ask how 

106  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
the child’s temperament, which is caused by neither a cerebral 
abnormality nor by experience being reared, might be involved with 
the inappropriate diagnosis of ADHD. There are two principal ways 
in which this is happening.
1 Temperament–environment misfit
When there is a poor fit between the temperament and the 
adult management, a reactive behaviour problem may emerge. 
This resulting problem may be misinterpreted as being the 
result of a nervous system defect for which drug treatment is 
recommended.
Seven-year-old Sally in an example of this. She was a likeable but 
somewhat ‘difficult’ child who had nevertheless been well adjusted 
at home and in kindergarten and first grade because of the under-
standing and skilful handling by her parents and teachers. In second 
grade she was assigned to a class with a rigid, demanding teacher. 
While some parents thought that this new teacher was excellent for 
their disorganized children, the poor fit was not helpful for Sally. 
Sally did not pay sufficient attention to the teacher and follow her 
directions about class or homework. The teacher advised her parents 
to seek medical intervention for her problems including the possible 
use of medications. Clinical evaluation quickly revealed that she did 
not have ADHD or other psychopathology but just a poor fit with 
her teacher and a resulting reaction. There was a power struggle 
between an inflexible child and an inflexible teacher. The paediatric 
consultant advised the parents to have a conference with the inex-
perienced teacher to explain to her what kind of child she was, what 
management had worked for them at home, and that, although the 
teacher should not modify her requirements and expectations for 
achievement, she could be more flexible in allowing extra time for 
young children who do not make changes quickly or easily. With this 
plan in effect, her performance in school improved rapidly to her 
previous level. Her temperament continued the same but the behav-
ioural disturbance disappeared. No DSM diagnosis was applied and 
no medication was needed or prescribed. Since a simple change in 
management brought such a dramatic improvement that one could 
readily discard the mistaken notion of brain malfunction. Years later 
Sally is working successfully as a teacher herself.

COPING WITH CHILDREN’S TEMPERAMENT   107
2 Temperament itself pathologized
Another common problem is that the temperament itself may be 
misdiagnosed as an abnormality. Since many teachers do not know 
about or recognize normal temperament variations, they may sug-
gest a diagnosis of ADHD because they do not have at their disposal 
sufficient training or experience to arrive at the correct conclusion.
A good example of this is Steve, a five-year-old boy who was just 
finishing a year in a preschool childcare centre and who was getting 
ready to enter kindergarten. On the last day his preschool teacher 
confidently informed his mother that Steve had ADHD and should 
be taking Ritalin®. His surprised and skeptical parents sought a more 
informed opinion. His parents recognized that he had a challenging 
temperament but they had been able to manage him well enough 
to avoid reactive behaviour problems. A review of his situation by 
his paediatrician revealed that he was not overactive, inattentive, or 
dysfunctional. He was a child with the low adaptability and other 
characteristics of a ‘difficult’ child but who was being managed well 
and successfully by his parents. The preschool teacher found him to 
be unlike most of her other students and, being unaware of normal 
temperament variations, had assumed that his differences were due 
to ADHD. No pathological diagnosis was called for and no medica-
tion. When Steve started kindergarten soon after, his experienced 
teacher regarded him as normal.
3 Temperament as a precursor to ADHD?
The next question is whether the child’s temperament can lead 
directly to an appropriate diagnosis of ADHD. The nebulous DSM 
criteria for ADHD complicate the discussion. Confusing the situa-
tion are the facts that the majority of those now getting the ADHD 
diagnosis have a ‘comorbid’ mental health condition, and the fact 
that half of all children are more active or less attentive than aver-
age, or both. Perhaps for these children their ‘comorbid’ behaviour 
or cognitive symptoms are the real underlying issue in children who 
just happen also to be more active or inattentive than average. Does 
that mean that those numerous children have ADHD?
On the other hand, if one uses a more stringent definition of 
ADHD as in the ICD-10 (WHO, 1992), then only 1–2% can be said 
to be affected (Schachar and Tannock, 2002). The ICD criteria are not 

108  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
just variations of normal, like ‘often talks excessively’ or ‘often has 
difficulty awaiting turn’ as in the DSM, but rather describe ‘disor-
ganized, ill-regulated, and excessive activity’, which is ‘often reck-
less and impulsive, prone to accidents’, and so forth. For these few 
the extreme activity or inattention may be derived from something 
other than a normal temperament variation and may possibly be 
organic in origin, such as with trauma, lead poisoning, or infection. 
This question remains unresolved, awaiting the establishment of 
clearer diagnostic criteria.
Relationship of temperament to other psychopathology
Bipolar disorder is now being widely diagnosed in the USA. This 
newly fashionable condition is so loosely and confusingly defined 
that it is likely that many children who are normally active, intense, 
non-adaptable, or otherwise aversive, are being erroneously labelled 
as having mania and being introduced to drug treatment.
Also, the difference between Social Anxiety Disorder and poorly 
supported normal shyness has yet to be clarified. Medication for 
shyness is a questionable practice.
Summary about temperament
The main points to retain about temperament differences in children 
and psychopathology are that temperament–caregiver misfits may 
result in reactive behaviour problems, which may be misdiagnosed 
as being based on CNS abnormality, as with ADHD. The traits them-
selves may be misinterpreted as abnormal; and the contribution of 
temperament to correctly diagnosed ADHD (dysfunction related 
directly to overactivity or inattention) remains obscure largely as the 
result of the ambiguities of the ADHD definition.
Problems with the DSM diagnostic system
One should not leave this discussion of the connections between 
temperament and psychopathology without attempting to clarify 
the deficiencies of the DSM diagnostic system of the American Psy-
chiatric Association. The current Fourth Edition is an improvement 
over the previous ones and all are better than the complete absence 

COPING WITH CHILDREN’S TEMPERAMENT   109
of any common language that existed just a few decades ago. One 
hopes that the Fifth Edition will advance the process further. The 
problems with this present version are part of our current difficulties 
with clinical and research diagnosis.
The DSM system, as a whole, rests on a static, categorical disease 
model, which often does not fit with observable reality. It is a cata-
logue of problems, which fails among other omissions to mention 
temperament and other normal behaviours. A better system, as pro-
posed by Jensen et al.  (2006), would be dimensional, adaptational, 
developmental, and contextual. Despite all of these shortcomings, 
there has been a generally uncritical acceptance of the DSM system 
by professionals using it, such as by the American Academy of Pedi-
atrics. There is also extensive evidence that, at the practical level, 
diagnoses are frequently being applied without the required criteria 
being met.
Several other diagnostic schemes are available, such as the ICD-10 
(WHO, 1992), DSM-PC (AAP , 1996), the DC 0-3 (NCIP , 2005). None 
of them have sufficient breadth or recognition of the child’s assets 
and interactions to meet the needs of this confusing situation.
Specifically, the defects in the diagnostic criteria for ADHD are 
extensive. The ADHD behaviours are not clearly distinguishable 
from normal temperament variations. The role of the environment 
and interactions with it are completely ignored. There is no clear 
evidence that the symptoms defining ADHD, such as frequently 
talking excessively, are related to brain malfunction. The diagnos-
tic questionnaires now in use are highly subjective and impression-
istic. My presentation of these objections and several others at the 
1998 NIH [National Institute of Health] Consensus Conference on 
ADHD (Carey, 2002) have been ignored by the leaders in the ADHD 
field.
To recapitulate this part of my paper, it seems that a substantial 
part of the confusion in diagnosis today is the failings of the current 
system.
Suggested changes to improve the situation
We all care deeply about the children entrusted to our care and to the 
parents and teachers who are trying to raise them as healthy human 
beings. What can we do to help?

110  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
We can promote a broader and deeper understanding of normal 
temperament and behavioural adjustment. Instruction about these 
matters should be included in the education of all child health and 
childcare professions. This information is readily available. Also, 
there has been suggested a summary of adjustment that is not just 
a list of problems but is a profile of six BASICS areas of function: 
Behaviour or social competence; Achievements; Self relations: self-
esteem, care, and control; Internal status: feelings and thinking; 
Coping strategies; and Symptoms of physical function: eating, elimi-
nation, sleeping, and so forth. Attachment is included but there are 
other important measures of outcome. (See Table 2.)
Also required is clearer diagnostic criteria for what is abnormal, as 
just mentioned. The DSM is not sacred and needs a radical revision.
Furthermore, we need better public education. Of the industrial-
ized nations, only in the USA and New Zealand can drug companies 
advertise directly to the public about their products requiring pre-
scription from physicians. This mistaken policy has led many citi-
zens to expect a ‘quick fix’—a pill or combination of pills that will 
quickly make life beautiful again. The professional medical, psycho-
logical, and educational organizations should take the lead here.
Also needing revision are other problems contributing to the con-
fusion, such as large payments from drug companies to physicians 
to get them to use and speak well of their products.
Conclusion
The central message of this paper is that the fully competent child 
physical and mental health professional needs a working knowledge 
of temperament differences and how to help parents to cope with 
them by better understanding and tolerating them, and by manage-
ment based on accommodation rather than behaviour modification, 
punishment, psychotherapy, or medication. Only when parental 
accommodation is insufficient to resolve the ‘poor fit’, should pro-
fessional intervention be considered appropriate.
This knowledge will help these persons to recognize normal 
variants, such as low adaptability, which usually needs only par-
ent counselling to keep the child functioning well. It should enable 
the professional to distinguish that some psychopathology is the 
result of the stress from a poor fit between the temperament and 

COPING WITH CHILDREN’S TEMPERAMENT   111
the caregiver handling, which can usually be altered adequately by 
parent counselling, or, when severe, by psychiatric intervention, but 
not by medication. It should also help the clinician comprehend that 
these results of poor fits, and even just the temperament itself, are 
frequently being misdiagnosed as ADHD. Such a point of view will 
lead to the understanding that, although a very small number of 
children (perhaps 1–2%) are dysfunctional because of very high and 
pervasive activity or inattention alone, much of the present diagno-
sis of ADHD is probably incorrect and leads to an unjustified use of 
psychotropic medications.
Sources for recommended temperament questionnaires 
based on NYLS traits
For parent ratings: Behavioral/Developmental Initiatives, 14636 N 
55th Street, Scottsdale AZ 85254, USA.
Tel.: 800-405-2313. Website: http://www.b-di.com (Dr. Carey 
helped to start the B-D I firm but is not an officer or owner of it.)
For teacher ratings: Roy P . Martin, Ph.D., 325 Aderhold Hall, Uni-
versity of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA.
Bibliography
American Academy of Pediatrics. (1996). The Classification of Child and 
Adolescent Mental Diagnoses in Primary Care: (DSM-PC) Child and Ado-
lescent Version . Elk Grove Village, IL.
American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and Statistical Man-
ual of Mental Disorders 4 th edition.  (DSM-IV) Washington, D.C. DSM-
IV-T.
Bakermans-Kranenburg, M. and van, I. Jzendoorn, M. (2007). ‘Research 
Review: Genetic vulnerability or differential susceptibility in child 
development: the case of attachment’. J. Child Psychol. Psychiat . 
48 (12): 1,160–73.
Barkley, R.A. (1998). ‘Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder’. Sci. Am . 
279: 66–71.
Carey, W.B. (2002). ‘Is ADHD a Valid Disorder?’ In: Jensen, P .J. 
and Cooper, J.R. (eds) ADHD: State of the Science: Best Practices . 
Kingston, N.J., Civic Research Institute.
Carey, W.B. and McDevitt, S.C. (1995). Coping with Children’s Tempera-
ment: A Guide for Professionals.  New York: Basic Books.

112  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
Carey, W.B. (2009) ‘Normal differences in temperament and behavioral 
adjustment’. In: Carey, W.B. and Crocker, A.C., et al.  (eds) 
Development-Behavioral Pediatrics . 4th edn. Philadelphia: Elsevier.
Chess, S. and Thomas, A. (1984). Origins and Evolution of Behavior Disor-
ders from Infancy to Early Adult Life.  New York: Brunner/Mazel.
Freud, S. (1950). ‘Analysis, terminable and interminable’. Collected 
Papers . 5: 316. London: Hogarth Press.
ICD [International Classification of Diseases] (1992). 10th edn. Geneva: 
World Health Organization.
Jensen, P .S., Knapp, P . and Mrazak, D.A. (2006). Towards a new diagnostic 
system for child psychopathology . New York: Guilford
Keogh, B.K. (2003). Temperament in the Classroom . Baltimore: Brookes.
Leuzinger-Bohleber, M., Fischmann, T. and Läzer, L. (2008). 
‘Triangulierung—ein zentrales Konzept der Frankfurter Prävention-
sstudie?’ In: Dammasch, F. Katzenbach, D. und Ruth, J. (Hg.) Tri-
angulierung . Lernen, Denken und Handeln aus psychoanalytischer 
Sicht. Frankfurt a. M.: Brandes & Apsel, pp. 131–65.
National Center for Clinical Infant Programs (2005). Diagnostic Classi-
fication. Zero To Three. (DC: 0-3) 1994. Revised DC: 0-3R.  Washington 
DC.
Rutter, M. and Taylor, E. (eds). Child and Adolescent Psychiatry.  4th edn. 
Oxford, UK. Blackwell. pp. 399–418.
Schachar, R. and Tannock, R. (2002). ‘Syndromes of hyperactivity and 
attention deficit’. In:
Sugarman, A. (2006). ‘ADHD and trauma’. Int. J. Psycoanal,  87: 237–41.
Thomas, A. and Chess, A. (1977). Temperament and Development.  New 
York: Brunner/Mazel.
Thomas, A., Chess, S. and Birch, H.G. (1968). Temperament and Behavior 
Disorders in Children . New York: NYU Press.
World Health Organization. (1992). International Statistical Classifi-
cation of Diseases and Related Health Problems  (10th Rev.). Geneva, 
Switzerland.
Books for parents
Carey, W.B. (with Jablow, M.) (1997). Understanding Your Child’s Tempera-
ment.  New York: Macmillan. Revised edition. Philadelphia: Xlibris.
Kurcinka, M.S. (1991) Raising Your Spirited Child.  New York: 
HarperCollins.
Turecki, S. and Tonner, L. (1985) The Difficult Child . New York: Bantam.

113DISCUSSION OF WILLIAM B. CAREY’S PAPER
Coping with children’s temperament: 
Early development and its disturbances
Jorge Canestri
Being in agreement with William Carey’s work in many ways, 
in my comment I will attempt to link his thoughts to some 
psychoanalytical concepts.
To begin with, Carey emphasizes the main focus of his thesis: ‘the 
current neglect of normal temperament differences has resulted in 
an overdiagnosis of CNS-based psychopathology and an overuse 
of medication’. This situation, which appears to be extremely wor-
rying in the USA according to the data provided by the author, is 
unfortunately not very different in Europe. The statements of some 
European psychoanalytical societies against the indiscriminate use 
of Ritalin® and other psychotropic drugs, also on very young chil-
dren, have remained—as usual—unheard.
The author rightly reminds us that there are temperamental dif-
ferences in children. The term ‘temperament’ is not common in 
psychoanalysis, but the concept can be easily traced. Carey defines 
temperament as ‘the characteristic way with which the child expe-
riences and responds to environmental stimuli’, and he outlines a 
short but interesting history of the concept—from the Romans and 
Greeks to the research carried out by Thomas and Chess, from 1956 
onwards (New York Longitudinal Study), resulting in nine normal 

114  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
traits and three clusters (difficult, easy, and slow-to-warm-up 
children).
Carey observes how early 20th-century psychology, in contrast 
with that of previous centuries, emphasized the dominant impor-
tance of the environment, with a few exceptions, among them that of 
Freud, who wrote in ‘Analysis Terminable and Interminable’ (1937: 
393): ‘each individual ego is endowed from the beginning with its 
own peculiar dispositions and tendencies’. The author of ‘Coping 
with Children’s Temperament’ attributes to the ‘general professional 
and public unfamiliarity with our growing knowledge about normal 
temperament differences’ an important responsibility for producing 
this state of affairs.
I could say that a great deal of contemporary psychoanaly-
sis, by excessively accentuating the effect of the environment and 
not acknowledging what Freud attributed to ‘nature’, is no less 
responsible. The match therefore seems to be between a so-called 
‘organic’ type of psychiatry that is blind to the relationship between 
natural gifts and environment, and a psychoanalysis that by neglect-
ing the Freudian concept of ‘complementary series’, ends up by 
never including X in its equations, X being one of the firm assump-
tions of the father of psychoanalysis. For a long time it appeared that 
X—that is, the inborn factors, dispositions, and tendencies—were 
not known and it was therefore useless to include them. I think that 
today it is not possible, or advisable, to continue along this line, espe-
cially when we see the effects that this contraposition between ‘org-
anicism’ and ‘environmentalism’ can provoke. The author shows us 
how ignorance about inborn temperamental differences can lead to 
unfounded, incorrect, and harmful diagnoses.
What are we really discussing in this and in many other cases, 
if not the classical, and in many ways outdated, ‘nature/nurture’ 
controversy—a controversy that from the point of view of biologists 
is meaningless?
Let us take a step backwards. Just as ‘temperament’ does not 
appear in Freudian terminology (at the most, the term ‘temperamen-
tal variations’ is mentioned by Breuer in ‘Studies on Hysteria, III’, 
pp. 196–197), neither do ‘nature/nurture’. Let us look at the terms 
used by Freud. Three terms occur frequently: ‘disposition’ ( Veranla-
gung ), ‘constitutional or innate’ ( Verfassungsmäßig ; Angeboren ; Natür-
lich) and ‘heredity’ ( Erblichkeit ; Vererbung ). Some terms conceptually 

COPING WITH CHILDREN’S TEMPERAMENT   115
linked to the previous terms are also used less frequently by 
Freud, such as Verkommenheit , that is, ‘degeneracy’, and Tendenz , that 
is, ‘proclivity’. The real problem however is not the terminology but, 
rather, the conceptual content.
I will not present you with a long list of all the occasions on 
which Freud referred to disposition, constitutional factors, or hered-
ity. I hope you will trust me if I tell you that we must begin with 
the letters to Fliess and finish with ‘Analysis Terminable and Inter-
minable’. In this latter work, Freud emphasizes how the economic, 
quantitative, and constitutional factor is the most neglected in psy-
choanalysis when dealing with studying the ego’s struggle to restrain 
the drives. It is not superfluous to recall that the concept invented 
by Freud to account for the etiology of neuroses, that is, the concept 
of complementary series , included in the ‘endogenous factor’—called 
fixation —both childhood experiences and hereditary constitution. 
This concept is in agreement with contemporary etiologic research 
that privileges multi-factorial models of illness  that take due account 
of the complexity principle. As Robert N. Emde (1988: 69) states in 
his work ‘Development terminable and interminable—1. Innate 
and motivational factors from infancy’: ‘Modern biology has been 
characterized as the biology of organized complexity, with modern 
developmental biology as the biology of increasingly organized 
complexity’ (p. 24). The more we delve into the so-called ‘nature/
nurture’ controversy, the more we understand the complexity of the 
nature/nurture relationship. However, it is possible to say that dis-
position can be considered as potentiality, that is, waiting for reali-
zation, unless we are faced with an illness of clearly genetic origin; 
but even in some of these cases, as in the well-known example of 
phenylketonuria, a diet free of phenylalanine, that is, adequate envi-
ronmental cure, would avoid the development of the serious conse-
quences deriving from the enzymatic defect. The influence of each 
dispositional and environmental element upon the other is constant 
and may transform the potential in form and substance. Neverthe-
less, it is not sufficient to describe a reciprocal and generic influence; 
it is necessary to go ahead with the research for specificity.
While apparently, in the nature/nurture polarity, the problematic 
and obscure term of the equation was ‘nature’—Freud’s X that it 
was impossible to access (let us not forget that genetics, as we know 
it, took its first steps in 1909)—the other term, interpreting ‘nurture’ 

116  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
as environment, did not seem to be much of an obstacle. But also 
in this case things turn out to be more complex than they appear. 
In the first place it would be wrong to consider the environment as 
a completely independent variable because, as R. Lewontin (2000) 
said, the environment of a living being might not only be the totality 
of independent and pre-existing problems to which the living beings 
have to find solutions inasmuch as living beings do not simply solve 
problems, but they also might create them. We do not always take 
into account that human beings, from a certain point onwards, con-
dition their environment. Emde (1988: 26) is aware of this when he 
says that:
… behavioural development is seen in terms of reciprocal rela-
tionships between the developing infant and the environment; 
new behaviours which result from this reciprocity, in turn, influ-
ence both infant and environment, and such an iterative process 
continues as the complexity of organization increases.
The incidence of infantile behaviour on the environment conditions 
the response of the environment and provokes new responses that 
are in their turn conditioning. Carey insists that this is where the 
need derives for parents, teachers, and professionals to have knowl-
edge of the inborn and normal  temperamental variety of children, in 
order to guarantee an adequate and non-iatrogenic response.
Studies carried out on monozygotic twins compared with non-
monozygotic twins, adopted siblings, or casual couples, have 
revealed that environmental effects that are not shared—for example 
the pre-natal developmental environment or the casual variations of 
the genetic pool—can prove to be more important than the shared 
ones. These results are of great importance in understanding mental 
pathology.
It is also important to mention that genes are activated or deacti-
vated during development in constant interaction with the environ-
ment, and that this influence is manifested throughout the whole 
course of the individual’s existence. Many researches could be 
mentioned here, but among them it is worth recalling the studies of 
S. Rutherford and S. Lindquist (1998, 2002) on the ‘chaperon’ pro-
teins and on the expression of genetic potentialities that are mute or 
hidden until an environmental event exposes them. The example of 

COPING WITH CHILDREN’S TEMPERAMENT   117
HSP proteins (Heat Shock Proteins 90) reveals the existence within 
the genome of potentialites that are not expressed,  but are available for 
manifestation in certain environmental conditions and at any age 
of the individual . Gene effects vary with the environment in which 
development takes place and environmental effects vary with the 
genetic constitution of the organism growing up in that environ-
ment. Nature and nurture coexist in reciprocity and this reciprocity 
begins before birth and continues throughout life.
It is clear that the environment does not alter the nature of the 
genetic pool, but it does modify the nature of the information that 
the cells can consult, and consequently the proteins that they can 
produce. These are phenomena of differential consultation. Recent 
studies better clarify how environmental risk factors are moderated 
by genetic influences, showing the importance of gene-environment 
interactions in humans. Let us consider the example of the MAOA 
gene, the gene that encodes MonoAmine Oxidase A, the enzyme 
that degrades amine neurotransmitters, such as dopamine, nor-
epinephrine, and serotonin. Caspi et al.  (2002: 851–854) in ‘Role of 
Genotype in the Cycle of Violence in Maltreated Children’ studied a 
large sample of male children from birth to adulthood to determine 
why some children who are maltreated grow up to develop antiso-
cial behaviour, whereas others do not. Functional promoter poly-
morphism in the MAOA gene was found to moderate the effect of 
maltreatment. Maltreated children with a genotype conferring high 
levels of MAOA expression were less likely to develop antisocial 
problems. They concluded that their findings may partly explain 
why not all victims of maltreatment grow up to victimize others, and 
they provided epidemiologic evidence that genotypes can moderate 
children’s sensitivity to environmental insults. These results were 
confirmed by the successive report (Caspi, 2003) on the serotonin 
transporter gene and the effect on the occurrence of depressive dis-
order, whereby the susceptibility gene had little effect in the absence 
of environmental stress or adversity, but had a substantial effect in 
moderating the environmental risk effect. In other words, the adverse 
environment had little effect in the absence of genetic susceptibility, 
but had a big effect in its presence (Rutter, 2005: 3–18).
In conclusion we can say that genes, in the great majority of cases, 
do not cause disease directly, rather, they determine only the way 
an organism responds to the environment. As was predictable, the 

118  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
progress made in genetics and molecular biology has begun to give 
form to the X of the Freudian equation. Today hypotheses about the 
cause of a number of diseases have evolved from one-cause theory 
to the view that it is a complex, multi-factorial, disorder caused 
by the confluence of many different types of risk factors (that is, 
genetic, biological, environmental, and psychosocial) with every 
type having a small effect on the increasing vulnerability to the dis-
order through their additive and interactive  effects. Environmental 
stimulation in several models of disease (for example, neurodegen-
erative) has demonstrated that therapy based on the principles of 
environmental enrichment might benefit disease sufferers. Neuro-
sciences have also demonstrated that the reorganization of cortical 
pathways is possible not only in early childhood—even if adapta-
tion to one’s own early environment would be expected to have 
the greatest impact—but that the brain is able to incorporate the 
structure of experience in its own structure through the lifespan. 
West and King (1987: 549–562) coined the term ‘ontogenetic niche’ 
to emphasize that the organism develops within an ecologic and 
social setting which, like its genes, it shares with its parents, school, 
and peer group environment.
I think that when he writes that ‘the child’s temperament (we 
are speaking of normal variations) can actually change the impact 
of the environment’, Carey aligns himself with the concept I have 
attempted to outline. The interaction between temperament (50% 
conditioned genetically, as the author reminds us) and the environ-
ment, may or may not fit, but this does not necessarily mean that 
a pathology is in action. The factors that influence the remaining 
50% are, as Carey says, of a multiple nature (pre-, peri-, and post-
natal non-genetic physical factors and psycho-social environment). 
He accurately describes both the effect that the temperament of the 
child has on the parents and teachers, and the effect that the feedback 
from the environment has on the child, which is certainly of much 
greater significance. His suggestions for a satisfactory management 
of the problem that may result as the consequence of an inadequate 
fit can certainly be shared without reserve by analysts.
Carey notes a dissociation between research on temperament at 
an academic level and the diffusion of such knowledge among pro-
fessionals and the public in general. I have tried to point out a similar 
deficit in post-Freudian psychoanalytic culture concerning research 

COPING WITH CHILDREN’S TEMPERAMENT   119
that provides content to the Freudian X of the complementary series 
and to his multi-factorial models of illness.
Relative to psychopathology, and more specifically to ADHD, 
the diagnostic criteria of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual 
(DSM-IV-TR APA 2009) are well known. Carey rightly underlines 
the shortcomings of the DSM: ‘ADHA behaviours are not clearly 
distinguishable from normal temperament variations [and] the role 
of environment and interactions … are completely ignored.’ As can 
be seen, these two characteristics of the DSM openly contradict the 
position that I have tried to describe previously.
The hypothesis of a ‘neurodevelopmental disorder’ to which the 
DSM implicitly adheres, has ‘some support’ (Carey) coming from 
molecular genetics and some from neural imaging (fMRI [func-
tional Magnetic Resonance Imaging]; PET [Positron Emission Tom-
ography]; Spect [Single photo emission computed tomography]). 
Genetical studies worked on the DBH gene, the locus that encodes 
the enzyme dopamine-ß-hydroxylase, which converts dopamine 
in norepinephrine, on the association of DRD4 in children with co-
morbid conduct problems, and so on. Neural imaging analysed the 
frontal lobe, the basal ganglia, and the vermis (see for example, The 
ADHD Molecular Genetics Network, 2002; Faraone et al. , 2002, 2008; 
Holmes et al. , 2002). As far as I know, and as Faraone in his comment 
of an international meeting on ADHD says: ‘Despite recent advances, 
more work is needed to better characterize heritable aspects of the 
ADHD phenotype as well as the actual candidate genes themselves.’ 
This indicates that the evidence we have accumulated so far is poor 
and not very specific.
Psychoanalytical interpretation, linked to an early relationship 
failure to provide the child with sufficiently stable supporting ego 
functions, insufficiently internalized impulse controls, and early 
emotional trauma (Leuzinger-Bohleber, Fischman and Laezer, 2008 
and Sugarman, 2006, quoted by Carey) appears to have, as Carey 
comments, a greater empirical basis. I will not dwell longer on these 
aspects, which we are more familiar with. It is sufficient simply to 
mention the recent panel at the Rio de Janeiro Congress and the report 
written by Sugarman (2006). As the report says, the panelists agreed 
on the contribution of early trauma. Bürgin states that ADHD may 
be considered as a syndrome, ‘but never an illness, even if common 
genetic base is postulate’. And, in agreement with what was said 

120  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
above, that: ‘Any possible genetic factor requires a specific situation 
and environment for its expression.’ The work presented by Marianne 
Leuzinger-Bohleber follows the same lines, with recommendations 
that are extremely close to those of our author—supervision, educa-
tion, psychological therapies, contact and training of parents, and 
cooperation with social and mental health organizations.
I believe, on the other hand, that it is important to emphasize 
Carey’s insistence on the role that failure to acknowledge a child’s 
temperament, with its normal variations, can play in the inappropri-
ate diagnosis of ADHD. Carey traces two main modalities through 
which this can happen. The first concerns the misfit between tem-
perament and environment. When this misfit is not recognized and 
confronted as such, it may lead to a diagnosis of ADHD and a con-
sequent indication for medication. The clinical example of Sally well 
illustrates this situation. The second modality refers to attributing a 
pathological meaning to the normal variations of a child’s tempera-
ment, as in Steve’s case.
One thing that must always be taken into consideration when 
defining certain behaviour as normal or pathological is the variation 
that results from comparing different environments and cultures. 
A comparative study carried out between a French centre for child 
and adolescent psychopathology and an Italian one, demonstrated 
that children who were diagnosed as normal in Italy, were consid-
ered to be hyperactive (and in some cases suspected as ADHD) by 
the French. Vice versa, children considered as normal in France 
were easily considered to be too dull, too rigid, and complaisant—
if not obsessive—by Italian child neuropsychiatrists. In this case 
the cultures are very close to each other, but we can imagine what 
‘diagnostic’ differences could be reached if the cultures were further 
apart.
Carey also emphasizes that one element that complicates diag-
nosis is the presence of ‘co-morbid’ mental health conditions. In 
fact, a good part of genetic research deals precisely with this condi-
tion, as I mentioned earlier, relative to the association of DRD4 in 
children with co-morbid conduct problems. The combination of a 
co-morbid mental health condition and an active or less attentive 
temperament could lead to a mistaken diagnosis of ADHD. The 
same considerations could apply to bipolar disorder or to Social 
Anxiety Disorder, as the author mentions.

COPING WITH CHILDREN’S TEMPERAMENT   121
Carey’s suggestions for improving the situation take into 
consideration various aspects of the problem: promoting an 
improved understanding of a normal temperament and of the role 
of the environment; improving and modifying diagnostic criteria; 
improving education; and, last but not least, confronting the scandal 
of the frequent and unhealthy partnership between drug companies 
and physicians. The dimensions of this scandal can be illustrated by 
the relatively recent regulation that, in scientific congresses, there 
must be an explanation of the type of relationship that scientists 
have with the drug companies when experimenting or studying one 
of their products. I am in agreement with all of these suggestions, 
and I think they can contribute to reducing the damage caused by an 
indiscriminate and unreasonable use of medication based on inac-
curate, if not incorrect, diagnoses.
Carey is correct when he emphasizes that this ‘pharmacologi-
cal’ policy leads people ‘to expect a “quick fix”—a pill … that will 
quickly make life beautiful again’. I think that psychoanalysts are 
fully aware of how deceptive this expectation is.
It only remains for me to thank the author for the work he has 
presented to us so well.



123CHAPTER FOUR
Motion and meaning: Psychoanalytic 
inquiry of so-called ADHD children
Heidi Staufenberg
Introduction
In the title of my paper, with the word ‘meaning’ I am citing a central 
concept in the history and theory of psychoanalysis. The object of 
our word is to uncover meaning. Allow me to refer here to Freud 
who once said that, ‘Interpreting means finding a hidden meaning.’ 
And we all know that ‘finding’ is meant quite ambiguously here: 
finding something hidden, something that of course exists, but also 
finding in the sense of inventing, of something after the fact. I can 
not, and do not, wish to enter into the debate on the construction 
and reconstruction of meaning here, but I believe it is important to 
be aware of this set of issues. After all, in our work with children 
we encounter a danger inherent in psychoanalytical interpretation 
in an especially acute manner. By which I mean the danger of not 
addressing the subject, and with our interpretation imposing an out-
side meaning on the subject, namely the ‘patient’. In other words, in 
psychoanalytical practice the focus must always also be on enduring 
the fact that there are things we do not know. Bion’s (1963) famous 
statement that ‘no memory, no desire’ is reminiscent of the stance 
I call for here, namely inner openness toward the patient, that is, be 

124  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
cautious of ‘knowing’ and understanding in that ‘understanding’ is 
all too easily only an ostensible matter and can lead to conclusions 
that go straight past the subject. This admonishment to be cautious 
should really be taken to heart when working with children as the 
child does not speak to us with the same level of intellectual abstrac-
tion and self-reflection.
Which brings us to meaning and interpretation. And to motor 
skills. It would perhaps be more appropriate to talk of ‘movement’, 
as ‘motor skills’ connotes a mechanical view of things, that is, it 
assumes that movement is a purely physical matter, and construes it 
as being completely separate from ‘meaning’. I am talking about an 
approach which centres on the complete opposite, namely the func-
tion of motor skills as psychological discharge and psychological 
defence, with the idea being to access the psychological properties 
that are defended. The psychoanalytical literature on hyperactivity 
on the one hand emphasizes the protective factor that the growing 
child retains from earlier days, as it were. By movement in space, by 
making a noise, the child endeavours to work off inner excitation 
and tension. The adult who curbs the movement easily slips into 
the role of an aggressor whom the child then feels it has to respond 
to by fleeing or counter-attacking. The child seeks in what it lives 
through to avoid a threatening situation and/or to gain control. 
Bodily movement understood in this way amounts to compensation 
for insufficient psychological self-protection. Beyond any pathology, 
we need to remember that movement is an elementary, vital expres-
sion: ‘Starting from the fetus’ first movements through to the child’s 
or the adult’s perfection of motor skills, we can understand proc-
esses of movements as a living expression of self- and object-related 
aspirations and psychological states’ (Berger, 1993: 145).
Recent research on infants by Beebe, Lachmann, and Jaffe (1997), 
Stern (1985) and others underscores how important it is for the 
mother to find a way of attuning to the infant. When ‘attunement’ 
succeeds, the mother recognizes the way that the infant expresses 
itself and seeks to establish a relationship, and she responds 
accordingly. The result is the responsive interchange in the course 
of which the child finds itself reflected, such that it can adopt the 
‘gleam in its mother’s eye’ for its own image of itself. Repeated 
experience of this containment by the mother, which responds to 
the infant’s initiative (or, as Winnicott [1971] puts it, the infant’s 

MOTION AND MEANING   125
‘spontaneous gesture’) is imperative if the child is to develop the 
ability to regulate itself.
In the case I wish to present here the focus is on accessing the 
concealed, denied, and ostensibly threatening meaning contained 
in the boy’s motor skills, and to render them acceptable to the boy, 
thus enabling him to develop more maturely. In this context, I have 
in mind Winnicott’s (1971) ‘holding function’ and Bion’s (1963) con-
cept of ‘containment ’, to which I shall primarily refer: containment 
as an elementary intra- and inter-subjective occurrence that consti-
tutes the basis for an evolving psychological process and for the psy-
chological structuring of the new-born infant; containment such as 
the mother accomplishes vis-à-vis the child by absorbing, empathiz-
ing, and working through the child’s affects and feelings which it 
cannot yet itself tolerate and integrate. The child must project these 
affects, which it cannot endure as its own, and must treat them as 
not belonging to it if it is to liberate itself from them. By absorb-
ing these affects, enacted violently in the form of yelling and fierce 
motor movement, and thus as a proxy containing and processing 
them, the mother can then give these intolerable affects back to the 
child in a changed form, as more tolerable feelings. In this way, she 
helps the child to develop its own ability to achieve psychological 
integration and provides the means by which the child can digest 
and itself work through what was previously intolerable. In other 
words, in this sense containment is closely linked, conceptually 
speaking, with the concepts of interiorization, internalization, integra-
tion, symbolization , and mentalization . The other side of the coin are 
the concepts of externalization , projection, rejection, dissociation , and 
denial . In our context, we discern above all such primitive defence 
mechanisms at work.
Research findings in the neuro-sciences have in recent years 
substantially expanded our knowledge of how the mature brain 
functions and the conditions under which it develops. We can 
describe with increasing precision the interaction of ‘genetically 
conditioned’ factors and influences from the social environment. 
Research by Panksepp (2007), Hüther (2006) and others shows that 
the genes do not set some automatic, determined programme in 
motion. Genetic expression is also shaped by psychosocial factors. 
The neuro-sciences are working to identify how environmental fac-
tors influence the pre- and post-natal maturation process. Allow me 

126  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
to quote neurobiologist Panksepp (2007: 67): ‘The better a child’s 
emotional needs are anticipated and the better they are addressed, 
the richer the positive knowledge matrix and the positive feeling of 
intersubjectivity are that then emerge in the child’s cognitive appa-
ratus.’ Given these findings by ‘hard’ science, it is all the more aston-
ishing that precisely in discussions on ADHD often far too little use 
is made of the insights offered. Instead, biologistically reductive 
notions of ‘genetically conditioned’ structures are encountered, ref-
erences to ‘functional metabolic disorders of the brain’, as if all that 
were involved were organic material that can only be influenced 
chemically, that is, by medicines.
The case
The case I wish to present to you involves Alex, a boy who at the 
time that the treatment commenced was six and a half years of age. 
The treatment ran for 210 hours twice a week and lasted for almost 
three years.
Alex’s treatment took place in the second half of the 1990s, and 
thus at a time when ‘ADHD’ was attracting greater attention in dis-
cussions. The patient’s parents had, at the recommendation of the 
kindergarten care worker, opted to have their son examined by a 
psychiatrist. The diagnosis was ADHD and Ritalin® was prescribed. 
However, the father specifically and strictly rejected any medica-
tion. He was warned: ‘It will be difficult for the child in school, so 
consider carefully whether Ritalin® is not administered, that would 
help your child.’ The parents took this caution seriously and sought 
out psychotherapeutic assistance.
Some important anamnestic information on the parents 
and on the patient’s prior history
The parents lead orderly lives. They both completed schooling and 
vocational training, the one in commerce the other in a crafts trade. 
The patient is their first child and they wanted the child. Their sec-
ond child, and again the child was wanted, is a girl, and six years 
younger than the patient. They have regular, but not especially inten-
sive, contact, to their respective families. Both sets of grandparents 
were divorced when the patient’s parents had reached puberty.

MOTION AND MEANING   127
The mother reports that initially the pregnancy put her on a high, 
she was full of zest and activity, until in the seventh month compli-
cations arose. There was the danger of a premature birth and she 
received tocolytics. During those last few weeks she felt that she had 
been abandoned, as her husband was on the road a lot for his job 
and actually only really at home at the weekends. No complications 
were encountered during the birth itself.
The infant, a screamer
Breast-feeding: frustrating for both mother and child, one hour at the 
breast, then an hour of sleep; the baby was weaned after six weeks.
The patient’s early infancy involved many illnesses and 
complications:
In its first year: ‘inexplicable diarrhoea’.
What followed were: ‘fungal complaints, vomiting, stomach 
aches, excess weight and difficulties going to sleep and sleeping dis-
orders during the first three years’.
At the age of three, the boy contracted neurodermitis, which 
eased after two years and several attempts at treating it. The child 
reacted defiantly to this.
After a difficult but complete toilet training, at the age of five, 
slight encopresis occurred whenever the boy did not wish to stop 
playing.
The mother insists that from the very beginning her son ‘fled the 
nest’. Between his third and sixth years, he incurred several injuries 
through daring actions. She was especially shocked when, at the age 
of about three, he deliberately caught his finger in a door because he 
did not want to believe that it would really hurt him.
The birth of his sister signified the first separation from his mother. 
After five days in hospital, the mother returned home to find her son 
‘recalcitrant and hard to reach’. The parents were worried by the fact 
that their efforts to prepare him for the birth of his sister did not pre-
vent Alex’s intensive and constant jealousy of his small sister.
The parents describe him as a boy who ‘happily walks across 
tables and benches’, does not know his own limits, swiftly rages, 
has temper tantrums, no friends, seeks only to order others around, 
swiftly hits others if he does not like something, and who attracts 
negative attention in any social group. In other words, we have the 

128  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
classic description of the behaviour of a hyperactive child who behaves in a 
way that stands out socially.
On the other hand, the parents remember him as being talented 
from the very beginning, as having surprised them by his early inde-
pendence, something they admired. And I would like to point out here 
that when tracing his early motor skills, which made him appear autono-
mous, the parents were able easily to libidinously and narcissistically 
cathect their trying child.
The mother describes herself as the calm pole at the heart of the 
family. In my experience she is a patient woman who is lovingly 
open to her children. She says she has the feeling that she always 
somehow owes Alex something, and that these guilt feelings never 
really dissipate and that she knows she gives in too easily, but sim-
ply always wants to make up for something. He had it so tough from 
the very beginning, she says. She reports, with reference to breast-
feeding him: ‘He was not able to find my nipple.’ It is a formulation 
that to my mind encapsulates the lack of success, the ‘mis-matching’ 
in the early mother–child relationship. The mother did not succeed in 
attuning well with her son. The infant, hardly ever to be calmed, did not 
enable the mother to experience herself as a  ‘good mother’. She herself expe-
rienced too little  ‘holding’ that could have helped her with her regression 
with the infant. Neither her husband nor a helpful mother figure were suf-
ficiently at hand for her.
The father describes himself as the pole that is diametrically 
opposed to that of the mother. He himself, he says, is very fidgety 
and hectic. This description he gives of himself concurs with my 
own observations. He seems driven, restive, indeed ‘fidgety’. The 
father defends himself for not having been able to better support 
his wife during pregnancy and in the period after the birth by citing 
the pressures of his job and his financial responsibility for the young 
family. He sheepishly confesses that he could not endure the infant’s 
screams and that he fled to his local pub. The father mentions the 
worries both parents have that their son might rob himself of a pos-
sible future. Alex, he says, is already made the scapegoat for things.
In our conversations it becomes clear how much the parents 
endeavour to maintain their positive image of their active son and yet 
helpfully identify the problems of the boy, who stands out socially, 
without inwardly turning away from him in disappointment. This 
is a danger that threatens the parents–child triangle all the more, 

MOTION AND MEANING   129
as now there is the second triangle with the sister, one that is not 
burdened down by feelings of guilt and failure. The mother says: 
‘She is a normal child. It’s a quite normal mother–child relationship; 
she likes cuddling, and I can calm her. She enables me to be all the 
things as a mother that I could not do with my son.’
Allow me to state here unequivocally: The problems of holding emerge as 
early as the child’s prenatal life, the issue of unclear limits/borders and the 
absent father, or lack of a father. The present anamnestic data is in keeping 
with a relatively typical picture as is often to be found in later diagnoses of 
ADHD. The countless aspects of early disturbances give rise to the ques-
tion of what level of psychological structure the child or patient actually 
possesses.
Initial meeting with the child
In the initial session with Alex I meet a normally developed boy, six 
and a half years of age, slightly overweight like his father, whom 
he closely resembles. The impression he makes is of a child who is 
friendly, open, and sociable. Alex immediately seizes the initiative 
as I ask him in the waiting room if he would like to come with me, 
jumping off his chair and saying, ‘But of course, I’ll come on my 
own!’ He rushes off into the corridor as if he knew his way about. 
In my consulting room he sits down at once and watches me wide-
eyed and expectantly.
His eyes turn to a chestnut tree. He talks incoherently of chestnuts 
they had collected; there were so many that ‘four men’ had had to 
carry the sack to the car. And he had even got some chestnuts with 
him; he wanted to fetch them and would be back in a minute. It 
took a few minutes for him to return from the waiting room where 
his mother and little sister were sitting. —I feel that he needed to 
reinsure himself of his mother’s presence like a small child, and his 
jealousy of his sister prevents him from feeling comfortable.
Even when he sits down there seems to be an aura of disturbance 
exuding from him. He appears to be under pressure. ‘What are we 
doing now?’ he asks, jumping up and rushing to the shelves of toys: 
‘Oh, Mikado!’ We play the game according to his rules, picking up 
the sticks alternately. I comment on this strategy, and he says he 
always plays it like that with his mother. ‘But then each of you has 
got the same number of sticks,’ I say. His reaction is to look at me 

130  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
briefly in an irritated way and look for something new in the toy 
shelves—table football.
With this game it becomes apparent how critical and negative his 
self-image is. He comments on even the slightest mishap with ‘Mind 
what you’re doing!’, ‘I’m so stupid!’, or ‘I’m hopeless!’
Then he takes the doctor play case. He hits his knee hard with the 
reflex hammer. One of the plastic bits drops off and flies through 
the room. He is scared. Yet at once his fear is blotted out with a roar 
of laughter and a hysterical ‘That’s funny!’ I say, ‘That’s how you 
get rid of the scared feeling.’ His reaction is a brief and wide-awake 
glance that immediately disappears in his next splurge of activity.
He now turns to the dolls’ house he had initially rejected as ‘girls’ 
stuff’, and there commences a wild family scene of increasing violence. 
Grandfather, sister, grandmother, and mother all end up being pushed 
headfirst into the lavatory bowl. Alex comments on this anal sadistic 
scene in a tone of artificial friendliness. He identifies with a little black 
doll that is the perpetrator of all the cruel acts. I speak of his feelings 
of jealousy towards his sister and say how mean he thinks it is that 
she gets so much attention from his mother. I continue, saying that in 
spite of her smallness his sister might seem huge and powerful to him 
since she is getting so much attention from his mother. He agrees to 
this and continues in his wild scenario. He attacks her fiercely and rap-
idly, getting carried away in his shouts and movements. I cannot keep 
up with this pace and feel excluded. I have feelings of helplessness and 
tediousness and a readiness to leave him to his destructive drives.
In the second session it becomes obvious how difficult it is for him 
to accept limits. He wants to go onto the balcony and collect chest-
nuts. He has opened the window and climbs onto the window sill. 
I move up directly behind him in case he loses his balance on account 
of his restlessness. I repeat what he is planning to do and how dif-
ficult it is for him to renounce anything. It is not until I say, ‘You’d 
better come back down now,’ that he is prepared to leave his position 
at the open window. He slides down from the window sill hanging 
on to me like a little child. I have the feeling that he has taken a brief 
opportunity to come closer into direct contact with his child’s needs 
for closeness, and yet feel a slight irritation that there is some quality 
to this touching which is inappropriate and somehow sexualized.
But Alex also expresses his explicit desire for limits that can hold 
him; he folds a paper plane out of the newspaper in the dolls’ house 

MOTION AND MEANING   131
and asks if he is permitted to do this. ‘I see how hard it is for you to say 
“Alex, stop it!” to yourself.’ It is almost ardent when he replies, ‘You 
say it for me!’—‘That’s what you want. Then it’s easier for you.’
Alex acts on impulse. His restlessness and excitement drive 
him to keep moving or require urethral anal rebuff. After a peace-
ful phase of painting or play activity he touches himself between 
his legs and says, ‘I want to pee.’ On the way back he runs ahead 
and before I can stop him opens the door to the other therapy room; 
shocked, he closes it again very rapidly and enters the next one, our 
room with the open door. ‘Why are you looking so cross?’ he asks 
me. I reply, ‘You were afraid I would tell you off. But I’m thinking 
about it; you opened the other door and disturbed the therapy ses-
sion. But you were scared. You didn’t mean to disturb anybody.’ 
He confirms this. I say, ‘You do everything so fast that that sort of 
thing often goes wrong. People sometimes don’t know if you did 
something deliberately or if it was an accident.’ He nods once more. 
I say, ‘And perhaps even you yourself don’t know what’s what.’ He 
answers, ‘Yes,’ and he packs away the toys and games and takes out 
the doctor play case again.
I have the impression that he is revealing his fear about what will 
happen to him here. After this interpretation he gives himself an 
injection and explains that it’s against the pain, just like at the doc-
tor’s. I say, ‘So it’s quite different from the game we played before 
about Granddad. He got speared up on Granny’s knitting needle. 
That would make anybody scared.’ He nods gravely. While we then 
both tidy up together, he asks me what is wrong with the other 
boy. ‘You’d like to know why the other children come here. You’ve 
already seen one boy in the waiting room. Perhaps you were even 
looking for him when you opened the door. I could understand you 
doing that.’ He listens quietly and attentively.
I have portrayed the initial sessions at length since all significant themes, 
conflicts, transfer, and counter-transfer phenomena become apparent that 
are to be the decisive factors in treatment and which also contain the typical 
elements for the psychodynamics of so-called ADHD children:
 need for closeness and containment that has never found good 
enough satisfaction;
 resultant problems of impulse control/restlessness in any 
instances of increasing aggressive or libidinous excitement;

132  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
 labile narcissistic balance, easily threatened;
 motor activity to release tension, self-regulation, and regulation 
of closeness and distance to object; tendency to sexualization as 
an attempt to reduce tension → he jumps off the table, runs out of 
the room;
 wish and search for limits for holding through objects → I should 
express orders;
 protest against orders;
 grasping towards infantile grandiosity as a defence mechanism 
against fear and for the regulation of self-esteem → reflex ham-
mer from the doctor play set;
 strict archaic devastating super ego  → ‘I’m stupid!’, ‘I’m hopeless!’ at 
table football;
 anal sadistic fear and wishes of destruction → in the dolls’ 
house;
 fixation of pre-oedipal structures of defective indifference and 
defective separation avoidance of phallic-oedipal structured 
rivalry → Mikado game;
 greed  → chestnuts;
 jealousy of sister;
 simultaneous object ‘hunger’ and object fear;
 difficulty in considering the object;
 concentration and peacefulness in harmonious/symbiotic non-
threatening dyadic situations; and
 reaction of the child therapist  → feelings of helplessness, tedious-
ness, annoyance, and inner withdrawal, that is, my aversion of 
the question of the significance of his activity.
Treatment
I would like to show the course of treatment by describing central 
scenes. The themes revealed in the initial sessions will be picked up 
and will show the development in a dramatic way.
To the first phase of the therapy I have given the title ‘Battles on 
the Setting and First Settlements’ since Alex enacted his problems 
and demands on being granted a free hand with no holds barred 
extremely rapidly. He runs out of the consulting room, shouts in the 
corridor, and disturbs other colleagues working next door. Totally 
unexpectedly, he interrupts a quiet game, and runs out. Thus there 

MOTION AND MEANING   133
develop the well-documented situations of helpless therapists with 
hyperactive child patients. On the other hand, I also regularly expe-
rience that I can reach Alex with my interpretations if they touch the 
central core for him. I say, ‘You find it difficult to stay in the same 
room with me. You want to get out fast. This is often the case. There 
is something in you that makes you restless and makes you run up 
and down.’ He calms down and wants to continue playing.
An impressive example of his reachability showing his ability for 
symbolization in a desperate scene, is when, in a tantrum, Alex acci-
dentally damages a toy telephone, and then continues to destroy the 
toy phone on purpose. My spontaneous reaction is, ‘Now it is totally 
wrecked. Maybe it shows how you sometimes feel inside.’ He opens 
his eyes as wide as he can, stops, and calmly responds, ‘Come on, 
let’s play something.’
His running in and out culminates in a first escalation. He ran 
out of the room and climbed onto the balcony through the corridor 
window while I ran up after him, talking to him, trying to reach and 
hold him. The object he desires is the chestnut tree mentioned in the 
initial meetings that has now cast off all chestnuts. With conquering 
the balcony he makes it clear that verbal acceptance and comprehen-
sion of his wish are no longer adequate. He is not able to accept the 
insight that renunciation is a necessity. He is thus on the fourth floor 
on a narrow balcony that goes around the entire building without 
a firm railing and held merely by two steel ropes through which a 
child might easily fall and Alex wants me to catch him: ‘Come on! 
Come on!’ In my fear and tension I say, ‘Alex, you can’t go on like 
that. Stop, you have to move very carefully. I’m afraid you might 
fall down. Look at the railing. It’s dangerous.’ He now looks a little 
scared himself and, moving close to the wall with utmost caution 
up to the window of the consulting room, he lets me help him climb 
back in. I can feel his fear. But at once this moment of fear is trans-
formed into a triumph and he shouts, ‘I’ve got my chestnuts and 
you can’t stop me!’
With this balcony scene we have a demonstration of the peda-
gogical and sociological aspects currently discussed in discourse on 
causes of ADHD; the loss of the inherent authority of the adult world 
that a child would automatically acknowledge and find hold in. The 
philosopher and psychoanalyst Benasayag and the psychiatrist and psy-
choanalyst Schmit have evocatively entitled this problem in their original 

134  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
French text, ‘ Les Passions Tristes’ (‘Sad Passions’) (2007) in which they 
give a lucid analysis of the difference between ‘authority’ and ‘authoritar-
ian’ on which they insist.
Alex likes to come to me but is unable to comply with ‘my’ rule 
that the sessions must take place in the consulting room. He runs in 
and out, discovering the library as a safe place for involving me in 
his game. Alex loves to put me in the situation of the stupid and 
inferior person under his total control. I am in danger of becoming 
the suspicious and persecuting object that wants to control every 
single step he takes and render myself untrustworthy. On an inner 
level I keep in touch with him by translating my helplessness and 
anger as a reflection of his inner situation towards the object and his 
oppressive affects.
Patient and therapist are at pains to find a mutual route. This pre-
supposes that Alex feels accepted, and this fits in the process lead-
ing from ‘my’ to ‘our’ rules. Alex had indeed accepted that he was 
not to walk onto the balcony. But as later becomes apparent only in 
the sense of prohibition—that still retains the appeal of defying the 
limits.
He does in fact once more climb onto the balcony and there is 
a repetition of the scene: my serious worry, his nervous scare, his 
return with my help, and his triumph. I am obliged to realize that 
he has the power to destroy the therapy. I tell him, ‘I cannot work 
with you like this and if you want to keep on coming we shall have 
to find a solution for the two of us.’ His top half is lying on the table, 
his face hidden in his arms. He looks up and says in a quiet and clear 
voice, ‘Ok. Agreed. No balcony, no more shouting in the corridor.’ At 
once he jumps up, turns around, grabs into the cash desk of the toy 
shop where there are many toy banknotes, flings them up into the 
air so that the toy money falls like a rainfall, and says, ‘But throwing 
money is not forbidden. We didn’t agree on that.’ At these words 
he smiles roguishly in a seductive way, but still shows he means it 
seriously.
With this behaviour he shows that he would genuinely like to 
find a mutual route with me. But he also shows that such a route is 
only tolerable for him if his feeling of autonomy is not hurt. It is as if 
there was some existential threat for his psychological survival if he 
is touched by the object, as if he were threatened of being devoured 
whenever he surrenders his control over others. That is why he must 

MOTION AND MEANING   135
remain unpredictable. With his acting out he can deny his deep fears 
and use his aggressions. Above all with his acting out he makes it 
clear how much at threat he would feel if he did not protect himself 
with this externalizing behaviour. In a way Alex is testing his object 
to see if it remains when their own narcissism has been hurt by him. 
For Alex it was important that his object set limits but never in an 
aggressive or embarrassing way.
With this step towards ‘these are our rules now because they make 
it possible for us to stay together’, Alex has renounced his claim to 
be almighty and unpredictable and acknowledged that he assumes 
responsibility for his behaviour stemming from interest in his own 
object and whose protection he must take into consideration. Alex 
has also been confronted with my limits that I too am not allowed to 
do everything, but am constricted by the set-up of the institution.
Remarks on questions of technique
In the further course of treatment there were frequent repercussions 
on the subject of ‘the rules’. On reflection it seems to me that some 
aspects both for me and for the patient could have been alleviated 
had I been able to react to him more rapidly and alter my position 
from the interpretative to the pedagogical therapist with greater flex-
ibility and more systematically. Alex’s words in the first interview—
‘Say it for me’—had already pointed in this direction. Through the 
following scene I finally understood how indispensable this concrete, 
unambiguous message from the object holding him was for Alex. He 
needed an object that accepted responsibility. By showing no fear of 
his protest it helps him to give up his protestation. At the beginning 
of the 60th session he goes straight away into the corridor and in 
the kitchen saying, ‘Today I have to break a rule,’ and, imitating the 
growling of wild animals, he rolls under the shutter of the kitchen 
that is a taboo zone for him. Instead of interpreting what he possi-
bly wants to express to me, I merely say, ‘Don’t act as if you were a 
wild animal. You are not. You know that and you know that I know.’ 
This intervention is not enough. He continues. I say in a sober and 
unimpressed tone of voice, ‘I do not know why you behave like this. 
This is not the place to behave like that.’ He glimpses briefly from 
under the shutter, gets up, and follows me into the consulting room. 
When working with children like Alex I am repeatedly impressed 

136  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
as to how much imagination, humour, and talent they reveal when 
they feel safe enough in a relationship. The competence they have 
is also tangible in the breaking of rules and provocation which had 
been consciously enacted and controlled.
At this stage I would like to add a few thoughts: on the basis 
of his concept of ‘fundamental emotional systems’ (‘ grundlegende 
Gefühlsysteme ’) Panksepp (2007: 81) suggests that so-called ADHD 
children be considered as children whose natural and developmen-
tal play activity has been excessively restricted and who therefore 
tend towards forms of play that are socially unacceptable. Regarded 
from this aspect, the countless struggles for power between Alex 
and me could also be regarded as misunderstandings. The child has 
its play behaviour and fights desperately not to have to surrender to 
the rules of the adults. And the adult, who is blinded by the inap-
propriate rule breakings, can no longer meet the authentic wish of 
the child.
Peaceful and concentrated togetherness
In scientific texts we are regularly confronted with the finding that 
so-called ADHD children are capable of concentrating when they 
are in a dyadic situation in which they experience the undivided 
attention of another person. Parents sometimes fear that the thera-
pist may not recognize the child’s problem since they are well aware 
that their child can be sunny in a face-to-face relationship. In this 
case, they tend to oversee that even this harmony demands parental 
compliancy to the child’s wishes. It is not the face-to-face situation 
per se, but rather the wish fulfilment and surrender to which par-
ents are prone in order to avoid provoking the temperament of a 
difficult child. The interests of both parties appear the same (‘indif-
ference’) and the conflict is thus suspended. This was also true for 
Alex and became apparent in the following scene: Alex had insisted 
on taking his mother into the consulting room. She had come with-
out her baby and Alex was making the most of this infrequent situa-
tion of having his mother to himself. Mother and son are painting in 
harmony, each one their own picture; it is to be a tree, which was the 
task agreed on. It culminates in a catastrophe. Alex’s tree is a typical 
child’s picture: the tree is round, full, and green. But he had wanted 
a picture like his mother’s, with the detail of branches and twigs. 

MOTION AND MEANING   137
He is not successful and throws the crayons across the room. The 
mother hesitates to show compliancy in my presence and refuses 
to fulfil his wish for her to draw ‘her tree’ for him. His screams and 
raging—‘I want a tree like my Mummy’s!’—are resumed when he 
gets home and he induces his mother to show him how to draw 
such trees.
He comes with pride to the next session and says, ‘Now I can 
draw a tree like my mother.’ From this statement there follows a 
development: He draws two trees, then paints a little bird in each 
tree, and says, ‘That one’s the Daddy bird and the other one’s a 
Mummy bird.’ The Daddy bird has got a long tail. The Mummy 
bird has got fluffier, brighter-coloured feathers. Alex says, ‘I like the 
Mummy bird better.’ And I respond, ‘Yes the Mummy bird’s nice 
and soft for cuddling,’ to which he responds, ‘But the Daddy bird’s 
got a big tail and that’s also something great.’ I continue, ‘Daddies 
and Mummies are a bit different in human beings too.’ He promptly 
replies, ‘I know what you’re talking about, you’re talking about 
making babies. I know how to do it.’ With pride he explains how 
babies are created and concludes, ‘When I’m grown up, when I’m 
grown up, I‘m going to make a baby too.’ As he says this he draws 
many tiny birds in the pictures.
These calm phases of concentration provide a basis for his inner psycho-
logical structuring. In these moments he can experience himself as subject 
able to hold conflicting emotions within himself and project himself into the 
future. He also shows his ability to tolerate a certain tension between his 
current existence as child and ideal vision of the adult male of the future; 
he also shows a stable masculine identity and fundamental identification 
with his father. In spite of all his difficulties Alex has clearly reached a level 
of oedipal structure. The goal of treatment will essentially be to retain and 
stabilize this self-image.
Alex varies the topics of his self-assertion and is in the throes of a 
process of integration; this cannot be straightforward but proceeds 
veering from progression to regression, from change to resistance. He 
makes good use of me as transference object and can sort out various 
aspects of his primary relationships in his interaction with me. For a 
long time I am unable to foresee when an interpretation can hold and 
structure him and when he takes the acknowledgement of his wish 
as permission to perform the wish. Not until the final third of treat-
ment do we reach a somewhat more stable situation. In a humorous 

138  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
way Alex is able to express how familiar he has become with my 
demand for analytical abstinence. He is still sometimes furious, he 
still loses control, and still tends to seek his triumph—yet all of these 
reactions are milder, more mature, and in a ‘held’ manner. He enacts 
in games what he once acted out in a wild way. He threatens, for 
instance, to flood the toilet, turns the water tap on so that the noise of 
running water makes me scared, and then says with a smile, ‘I once 
used to do things like that. Did you think I’d do it again?’
Playing Mikado shows his development and how he is able to 
handle the challenges of reality and rivalry. He wanted to know the 
proper rules of the game and put aside the ‘motherly’ world which 
suggested equality. Mikado became a symbolized confrontation 
with the rules of ‘Father’s’ world and paternal law.
Before I turn to the significance of the father in my final point 
I should like to sum up what Alex has reached in the course of ther-
apy: We were able to avoid the imminent relegation from normal 
school. In this critical phase I saw him for three sessions a week. In 
the new school his behaviour became more consistent. After moving 
house he came to a school whose headmaster was confident of find-
ing a way to contact this ‘wild boy’. He could handle his jealousy of 
his sister by resorting to the existing identification with the role of 
the protective big brother who views his oedipal child in the younger 
one. His relationship to his mother remained the reliable base for 
him in spite of earlier problems. His mother partly succeeded in 
being less lenient towards him. To her surprise she discovered that 
he did not mind her clear ‘no’. The relationship towards his father 
remained the most difficult part. There were only phases where the 
father was able to participate and he then expected that everything 
would function perfectly. There were long phases in the therapy in 
which Alex used therapy to work through his disappointment and 
anger towards his father. He remained an impulsive and emotional 
child. But he was more able to control his impulses and no longer 
rendered helpless by them, but able to use his intelligence, humour, 
and imagination to express them in a symbolized way.
‘The father and unfulfilled hunger for a father’
Self-doubts and feelings of personal worthlessness cause Alex to 
cling in desperation to his almighty pretensions. This is doomed 

MOTION AND MEANING   139
to failure and he is re-exposed to self-condemnation and an 
undermining of his rigid, archaic super-ego. To halt this vicious cir-
cle a long therapeutic process with interweaving stages of working 
through is necessary. By working through various topics, conflicts, 
fantasies and stories Alex became able to moderate his pretence 
being omnipotent. They lead him to his story with his father where 
he unfolds his inner struggle. Alex admires him and wants him to be 
proud of him, yet gets only annoyance, anger, and disappointment. 
He is aware that his father himself has problems with controlling his 
affects. In play, Alex shows a cruel father image full of deprecation 
towards the object and unbridled anger. This father cannot serve 
as a triangulating object for him in a sufficient way; he is more the 
aggressor for him with whom Alex then identifies. He is thus bound 
in a malignant vicious circle of persecution and punishment that 
binds him to externalizing mechanisms.
In my paper I have emphasized the confrontation with rules 
since in my opinion these most clearly show the transference posi-
tion in which for Alex I represented the father’s world to which he 
was seeking entry and with totally unsuitable means of a grandi-
ose encroachment with which he could not succeed. The image of 
‘wild boy’ presented a positive masculine model in the eyes of both 
parents, available to the boy, yet giving him no structuring lifeline 
to achieve ‘masculine’ demarcation with which he can identify 
and model himself. Phases of rapprochement between father and 
son with mutual trips, exclusively ‘masculine’ undertakings such 
as fishing and repairing bicycles, put fresh impetus into Alex. He 
then shows an impressive structural competence after his hunger 
for a father has been satisfied and must no longer rely on the mother 
alone, who remains the archaic mother that he needs release from.
Like all patients who are referred to me with the diagnosis of 
ADHD Alex did suffer from an insufficiently available father. The 
movement of the children in the room—and I refer almost without 
exception to boys—appears to me as if they are actually seeking their 
father who can tell them to stop, who accepts them and introduces 
them into his world. From this aspect the apparent lack of purpose 
in this restlessness may also have significant meaning: as if the boys 
are constantly on the move to seek their father and their masculinity, 
yet, in never reaching the target, compensate in their restless move-
ment. By alloying their inner restlessness with their fantasies of what 

140  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
is masculine, they can confirm to themselves that they are ‘great 
guys’ and can defend against the shame of being only ‘wild boys’. 
Driven by need they idealize impulsivity to ascertain their masculin-
ity. Their developing manhood—as is confirmed by a large number 
of authors—is under concrete threat in various ways. The child envi-
ronment is dominated by the female and offers scant similarity to 
their object and no comprehension for specific needs of gender iden-
tity to try out the boy role (cf. Dammasch and Metzger, 2006). It is 
no mere coincidence that Alex’s situation became more relaxed after 
changing school. Alex’s wild behaviour and destructive activity in 
lessons at the old school had been addressed at his father: His father 
should pay attention and take time off to be with him.
In psychoanalytical literature the father’s role as triangulating 
third party, offering the child the perspective from a third dimen-
sion, has been discussed from various aspects. Fonagy and Target 
(2002) emphasize the father’s significance above all as the one open-
ing the child’s eyes to reflect the relationship experience. With this 
ability the child is able to see himself in his relationship to others, ini-
tially of course to the mother, and thus widen his space for thinking 
and transcend the ‘perception of his psychological self’ (‘ Wahrneh-
mung seines psychischen Selbsts’)  (p. 301). He can, as it were, enter the 
world. Alex had a problem with restricted ability to relate to others 
and move as equals (‘ par inter pares’ ). He could deny and reject his 
sorrow about his outsider status at school. But he was sad and des-
perate about not finding any friends and felt deep down inside that 
friends would open up a new world for him and help him towards 
genuine autonomy. That this had changed was the most important 
thing he wrote in his farewell letter: ‘… and I am happy that the 
other kids like me now.’
Bibliography
Beebe, B., Lachmann F. and Jaffe J. (1997). Mother-Infant Interaction: 
Structures and presymbolic self- and object representations. Psycho-
analytic Dialogues , 7: 133–82.
Benasayag, M. and Schmit, G. (2007/2003). Die verweigerte Zukunft . 
München: Kunstmann.
Berger, M. (1993). ‘Und die Mutter blickte stumm auf dem ganzen Tisch 
herum’. Kinderanalyse, 1. Jg ., 2: 131–49.
Bion, W.R. (1992[1963]). Elemente der Psychoanalyse . Frankfurt a.M.: 
Suhrkamp.

MOTION AND MEANING   141
Bovensiepen, G., Hopf, H. and Molitor, G. (Hrsg.) (2002). Unruhige und 
unaufmerksame Kinder: Psychoanalyse des hyperkinetischen Syndroms.  
Frankfurt am Main: Brandes & Apsel.
Dammasch, F. (2002). ‘Er weiß nicht, wo er anfängt und wo er aufhört!’ 
In: Bovensiepen et al. Unruhige und unaufmerksame Kinder: Psychoan-
alyse des hyperkinetischen Syndroms.  Frankfurt am Main: Brandes & 
Apsel. pp. 257–311.
Dammasch, F. and Metzger, H.-G. (Hrsg.) (2006). Die Bedeutung des 
Vaters: Psychoanalytische Perspektiven . Frankfurt am Main: Brandes & 
Apsel.
Diller, L.H. (2002). ADHD: Real Disease or American Myth.  Rom, 10. 
October. Available from: http://www.docdiller.com
Fonagy, P . and Target, M. (2002). ‘Zum Verständnis von Gewalt: über die 
Verwendung des Körpers und die Rolle des Vaters’. In: Kinderanalyse,  
10. Jg., 3: 281–307.
Gilmore, K. (2000). ‘A Psychoanalytic Perspective on Attention Deficit/
Hyperactivity Disorder’. J. Am. Psychoanal . Ass. 48 (4): 1,259–93.
Heinemann, E. and Hopf, H. (2006). AD(H)S. Symptome—
Psychodynamik—Fallbeispiele—Psychoanalytische Theorie und Therapie.  
Stuttgart: Kohlhammer.
Hüther, G. (2006): Die nutzungsabhängige Herausbildung hirnor-
ganischer Veränderungen bei Hyperaktivität und Aurmerksam-
keitsstörungen. Einfluss präventiver Maßnahmen und therapeutischer 
Internventionen. In: Leuzinger-Bohleber, M., Brandl, Y., Hüther, G. 
(Hg.). ADHS—Frühprävention statt Medikalisierung. Theorie, Forschung, 
Kontroversen . Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht. pp. 222–37.
Lacan, J. (2001). “The Mirror Stage as Formative of the Function of the 
I”, in Écrits: A selection, London, Routledge Classics, 2001, p. 5
Panksepp, J. (2007). ‘Die psychobiologischen Langzeitfolgen der emo-
tionalen Umwelten von Kleinkindern für das spätere Gefühlsleben—
Forschungsperspektiven für das 21: Jahrhundert’. In: Streeck-
Fischer, A. (ed.) pp. 45–104.
Pozzi, M.E. (2001): Ritalin für wen? Wie können wir das Bedürfnis nach 
Ritalin in der Psychodynamischen Beratung von Familien verste-
hen?’ In: Analytische Kinder- und Jugendlichen Psychotherapie  (AKJP) 
112: 519–42, Frankfurt am Main: Brandes & Apsel.
Stern, D. (1922[1985]). Die Lebenserfahrung des Säuglings . Stuttgart: Klett-
Cotta.
Streeck-Fischer, A. (Hrsg.) (2007). Adoleszenz—Bindung—Destruktivität . 
Stuttgart: Klett-Cotta.
Streeck-Fischer, A. (2006). ‘ “Neglekt” bei der Aufmerksamkeitsdefizit—
und Hyperaktivitätsstörung’. Psychotherapeut , 2: 80–90.
Winnicott, D.W. (1973[1971]). Vom Spiel zur Kreativität . Stuttgart: Klett.



143DISCUSSION OF HEIDI STAUFENBERG’S 
PAPER
ADHD from the empirical and clinical 
perspectives
Annette Streeck-Fischer
Can psychoanalysis, with its approaches to explanation, 
hold out against biomedical models of ADHD?
In child psychiatry and psychotherapy, not only different ideologies 
regarding the healing and application of different therapeutic meas-
ures in relation to the syndrome ADHD have grown stronger, but 
also unexpectedly militant discussions, which can be explained, on 
the one hand, by different theories of illness and ideologies regarding 
disorders and, on the other, through reflecting occupational, politi-
cal, and economic interests but, however, rarely placing the well-
being of the child at the forefront of considerations. At the centre of 
the discussion is frequently the question of what primarily deter-
mines this disorder, the constitution or the conditions necessary for 
its development: the genes or the environment (Rutter, 2002).
And so, from time to time, the question is sometimes raised of 
whether the disorder is one that can only be explained outside the 
framework of psychoanalytic thought. A critical inspection of the 
biomedical models, however, highlights the significance attributed 
to gene expression and consequently the psychodynamic devel-
opment perspective. Even indications of a high rate of inheritance 

144  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
of 90% (in behavioural genetics, monozygotic twins show a high 
concordance of 0.5–0.9) [Levi et al. , 1997]) does not mean that envi-
ronmental conditions do not have a high influence on development 
(Rutter, 2002). Such behavioural genetic studies, which were carried 
out on three-year-olds, can likewise be viewed relatively, just like 
the dopamine-deficit hypothesis and with that the associated poorly 
developed receptor or transporter genes (for example, Taylor, 1995; 
Sandberg, 1996; Döpfner et al. , 2000). Findings obtained from ani-
mal experiments show, above all, that dopamine concentration in 
the brain is also dependent on social ranking (Spitzer, 2002). With a 
higher position in the hierarchy within a group of monkeys, a higher 
concentration of dopamine was also found and vice versa. As chil-
dren with ADHD, as a rule, occupy a low position or have the role 
of an outsider, a lower dopamine level is to be expected in the brain. 
Also, indications of a disorder of neuronal development in ADHD 
does not mean that this has a primary genetic origin—as we know. 
Studies carried out by DeBellis et al.  (1999), Kishiama et al.  (2008), 
and Teicher et al.  (2002), amongst others, highlight the negative 
effects of unfavourable environmental factors on the development 
of the brain. Finally, the deficits in self-regulation in working mem-
ory and executive functions, which are proclaimed to be genetically 
determined, have been made relative as a result of investigations of 
early mother–child interactions.
The question of which conditions result in the genetic expression 
of ADHD has, up until now, been insufficiently examined. From 
empirical research, it is clear that perinatal complications play an 
important role. The fact that a mother smokes has not been demon-
strated as always being of importance for the development of ADHD 
(Ben Amor et al. , 2006). However, it has been shown that sensory 
motor disturbances, which are time and again stated as being con-
stitutionally determined, can be the consequence of early disorders 
of regulation which are frequently to be found in ADHD (Desantis 
et al. , 2004). In addition, specific attitudes on the part of care pro-
viders towards children who develop ADHD have been established. 
This type of attitude is characterized by intrusive, over-caring, and/
or negative patterns of relations that lead to disturbances in self-
regulation and in the area of executive functions (Olson et al. , 2002; 
Silverman and Ragusa, 1992). Moreover, it has been possible to dem-
onstrate specific family interactions, such as hostile attitudes and/or 

ADHD FROM THE EMPIRICAL AND CLINICAL PERSPECTIVES   145
diffuse or rigid boundaries between members of a family (Jacobvitz 
et al., 2004).
Is it meaningful to adopt the psychiatric diagnosis 
of ADHD in psychoanalytic terminology?
ADHD is recorded in a dimensional fashion in psychiatric diagnosis 
(Döpfner and Lehmkuhl, 1997). The disorder comprises three char-
acteristic behavioural features, a disorder of attention, hyperactivity, 
and impulsiveness. However, these symptoms can be found with 
different manifestations in very many syndromes, such as borderline 
disorders, anxiety disorders, depression, narcissistic disorders, and 
traumatic stress disorders. In this context, it would be interesting to 
examine whether there are different rankings of the three symptom 
clusters in each of the different syndromes.
The diagnosis of ADHD from the psychodynamic perspective 
therefore includes, as a matter of course, a wide range of disorders 
which are manifest both as conflict dynamics as well as the result of 
deficient ‘Ego’ structure development. In the fist case, ADHD serves, 
with the triad of symptoms, as defensive and protective behaviour 
in the event of stressful and threatening dangers from inside or out-
side (for example, in order to avoid unbearable feelings of anxiety 
or sadness). In the second case, aspects of disorders of development 
are at the forefront, such as, for example, inadequate tolerance of 
tension or a disturbed control of impulse.
We therefore can say that it is a syndrome of disturbances which 
are associated with an ADHD symptomatic. Nonetheless, there are 
conspicuous features which are specific to ADHD which can be 
identified, which are imminent to the triad of symptoms, such as a 
lack of an ability to perceive and regulate affect, a lack of an ability to 
tolerate conflict and tension, mentalization disorders, and disorders 
of relationships (cf. guideline ADHD).
On the basis of the first proposals of child psychotherapists which 
were sent to experts from the statutory and private health insurance 
companies and which were used by child psychiatrists, paediatri-
cians, and general practitioners for the diagnosis of ADHD, an eval-
uation was made of which diagnoses were made by children and 
adolescent psychotherapists. Of 30 cases, there were 10x a diagnosis 
of a narcissistic disorder, of which 5 were a narcissistic-depressive 

146  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
disorder, 8x depressions, 10x anxiety disorders, 4x borderline 
disorders, 1 asocial development, 2 disturbances of adjustment, 
2 post-traumatic stress disorder, and 2 early disorders (Streeck-
Fischer, 2005). The diagnosis of a narcissistic disorder was the most 
frequently named one. But, we did not find such a one in the ICD-10. 
One could, however, ask whether ADHD is congruent, to a large 
extent, with a narcissistic problem—a narcissistic disorder in this 
context is understood to be a problem which can occur at all stages 
of development.
The family situation, as well, shows specific attributes. Of the 
30 cases referred to, in 18 the father was absent as a consequence 
of death, earlier, or later separation; 4 were frequently absent; 3 in 
a difficult position; one was chronically ill; and 4 fathers were not 
referred to. Of the mothers, 10 were intrusive; 7 were over-caring in a 
monopolizing sense; 7 set inappropriate boundaries; 2 were incestu-
ously sexualizing; 2 were disciplinary and restrictive; 4 were reject-
ing; 3 depreciative; and 5 neglecting. This means that, in the event of 
the development of ADHD, the father is more likely to be absent and 
neglecting whereas the mother, for her part, is over-caring, intrusive, 
does not respect the boundaries of the child, going as far as sexualiz-
ing and being incestuous, and/or, on the other hand, ignores, rejects, 
is depreciative, and neglecting. Therefore, there is no uniform type 
of mother. However, disorders of self-regulation can arise both as a 
result of over-caring attitudes, as well as also as a result of neglect. 
Both attitudes can prevent the development of a corresponding 
competence.
When the dialogue fails …
Frau Stauffenberg has presented an impressive case of the 7-year-old 
Alex who was treated successfully, which is very interesting from a 
number of viewpoints. Here, it will only be possible to go into a few 
noteworthy aspects.
Unfortunately, there is much regarding the parents that remains 
unclear, as their anonymity must be guaranteed, but the question is 
raised of which transmissions of unconquered conflicts are present 
in them. In this context, it is not infrequent to find conflicts with 
the male sex on the part of the mother which are fought against or 
which remain unconscious.

ADHD FROM THE EMPIRICAL AND CLINICAL PERSPECTIVES   147
In ADHD, the family frequently shows a specific constellation. 
The father is mostly absent, the mother shows intrusive, over-caring 
behaviour with tendencies infringing on incest. The lack of setting 
boundaries on the part of the mother induces anxiety in the young 
boy and this has exceptionally unfavourable consequences for the 
development of autonomy and competence (Dammasch, 2002). The 
child’s own experience of being able to cause an effect, which results 
in mastery, are hindered.
In addition, as in the case of Alex, there are early stressful condi-
tions, especially long-lasting chronic stress, which have unfavour-
able consequences for self-regulation, the executive functions, and 
the ability to control impulses and behaviour. Barkley (1997) has pro-
posed an interesting model of how we can understand the develop-
ment of ADHD. Although or precisely because he is a representative 
of the biomedical viewpoint and has well documented the structural 
problem of these children, this will only be gone into in brief here. 
He drew attention to particular correlations in development. The 
development of an inadequate ability to control behaviour through 
to goal-directed behaviour is based—according to Barkley (1997)—
equally on four different pillars of development. First amongst 
these is self-regulation, the regulation of emotions, motivation, and 
arousal. This is linked to the ability to put off or delay and control 
needs and wishes, and the ability to adopt a perspective. From the 
psychoanalytic perspective, one could also add that, with this, the 
ability for negative capability (Bion, 1962) could also be meant, 
which means the ability to bear a moment of uncertainty, to be able 
to pause. Working memory as the second pillar determines the abil-
ity to anticipate, to have a time perspective, and to call up memories 
in the present situation as a treasure of experience. One could sup-
plement this, at this point, by mentioning the ability to utilize anxi-
ety as signal anxiety. The internalization of language represents the 
third column, with the ability to use language and to draw on this in 
carrying out an action, to reflect, and to mentalize with other words. 
The ability of reconstitution as the fourth pillar enables a kind of 
synthesis. From the psychoanalytic perspective, this will be attained 
with the synthetic integrative ‘Ego’ functions (Nunberg, 1959). The 
inadequate ‘Ego’ capacity in the case of ADHD children has been 
draw to our attention by Gilmore (2000) in his Rorschach investiga-
tions (cf. Streeck-Fischer, 2006).

148  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
In Alex’s early development, there were a whole range of 
unfavourable factors. The baby could not find the mother’s breast, 
an indication which allows one to suspect that the early sensitive 
tuning between mother and child caused problems from the very 
start and which then developed into marked disturbances. He 
was a howling baby; there were disturbances of eating; he had 
long-lasting diarrhoea. He frequently vomited. These are all cir-
cumstances that confront the mother with her own insufficiencies 
and deficiencies. Moreover, he reacted with neurodermitis, that 
is changes to the skin which result most frequently in aversive, 
painful experiences when contact is made with the skin. It can be 
assumed that the early interaction between the mother and the 
child was frequently stressful, a situation which was not compen-
sated for by the presence of a third person. Alex was apparently 
confronted by conditions of pain, disorganization, and unregu-
lated stress, which may have resulted in over-excitement and 
hyperactivity instead of peace and contentment. In comparison, 
a mother appears—probably as a result of feelings of anxiety and 
helplessness—to have tried unsuccessfully with inappropriate 
actions, which the infant may have experienced as being intru-
sive and overwhelming, to create bearable conditions. It can also 
be assumed that she was increasingly exhausted, brought to her 
limits, and that she possibly also reacted with annoyance or anger. 
Motherly functions of providing early care, like mirroring, neu-
ropsychobiological regulation, and sensitivity, were not conspicu-
ous, so that the ability of mentalization (Fonagy et al., 2004) was 
adversely affected. In this way, there was an absence of the pre-
requisites for secure attachment. Securely attached children learn 
to make use of their feelings and their thoughts, and to determine 
their reactions based on these. They can express their feelings 
and are cognizant of their inner states. Instead of this, there were 
marked disturbances of encoding and decoding childish behav-
iour on the part of the mother. The alien gestures of the mother 
heightened the mismatch, whose consequences were intrusive 
and instrumental actions. confusion and helplessness, and prob-
ably also speechlessness, broadened.
In the case of disruptions to the early affect-motor sphere, hyper-
activity and disorders of attention can be viewed as being part 
of a surfacing, but not yet experienced or reflected emotion. The 

ADHD FROM THE EMPIRICAL AND CLINICAL PERSPECTIVES   149
multiple disorders in executive functions and self-regulation can be 
explained by the unfavourable conditions of care.
When the play becomes real and runs out of control
The child’s play, which takes place in a room designed for the 
purpose, is constituted by the space of the As-If in which the child 
can think, speak, act, and develop. The play is real and, at the same 
time, not real. The play develops into real action when the space in 
which the play takes place is not (safely) anchored (Solnit, 1987). 
In such cases, the restoration of dangerous, exciting, overwhelm-
ing, and forbidden real scenes may arise. Under such circumstances, 
transitional space, in which therapy, communication, and develop-
ment are made possible, break down (Streeck-Fischer, 1997). The 
play goes out of control and becomes a real event. Overwhelming 
and forbidden scenes are restored, in which the therapist is so help-
less, so paralyzed, and shocked, or behaves in a rigid manner which 
the child experienced with the earlier care providers. The boundary 
between ‘I’ and ‘you’ and the oedipal law then ceases to exist. The 
therapist is then just as glued to the child as it was to the earlier care 
providers and is, without boundaries between self and object, good, 
allowed, and bad, forbidden, outside of time and space.
Alex creates such scenes again and again, and completely unex-
pectedly. Initially, the therapist is not able to contain her anxiety and 
confusion, as the situation is truly dangerous, forbidden, and seduc-
tive, and she herself becomes truly overwhelmed—and then she 
is initially so petrified or intimidated, or reacts threateningly, like 
Alex’s internalized early object. The therapist is, however, successful 
in the course of the therapy in creating such a space in which therapy 
can take place. She sets limits and makes mutual agreements with 
him, which the child is more and more able to comply with.
The therapist mentioned the fact that she needed pedagogical 
interventions instead of interpretations. Here the question is raised 
of whether it really needed pedagogical action. In development 
therapy, as is needed in this case, we discover the sense of the uncon-
scious not in the concealed, but in concrete actions. The framework 
which is represented by the ecological milieu, as Treurniet (1995) 
says, formulated differently, a basic mild and positive transference 
relationship, is destroyed or damaged by attacks, for which one 

150  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
needs to be prepared. In this case, active work on the framework and 
a stable relationship is necessary. The structure of the self provided 
by the framework (Green, 1975) is a prerequisite for the ability to 
symbolize and to mentalize (Fonagy et al., 2004).
Alex creates direct, real threatening situations—on the balcony 
without grounds, for instance, guided by his need for immediate sat-
isfaction (getting chestnuts). At this point, the therapist can only react 
in reality in the same way—stop—stop—watch out—combined with 
affective reactions, such as I do not want you to be endangered, that makes 
me afraid . And then— I cannot work or play with you when you do such 
things . We need agreements. Such authentic reactions set the bounda-
ries which he could not experience before, because it refers to a mother 
absent in one way or another, perhaps paralyzed or traumatized. 
Such an answer is not pedagogical, but points to the original sense. 
An affective reaction is offered that draws boundaries from a new 
development object which, in its supporting and orientation-giving 
function, has not existed up until now (cf. Hurry, 2002). Inasmuch, the 
work on framework and boundary setting is a basic offer promoting 
development. Only then, when there is correspondence here, will it 
be possible to reflect, to use words, to contain, and so forth.
Outlook
With regard to the clinical picture of ADHD, there are challenges 
presented to psychoanalysis, which in a certain way are similar to 
those which have been emphasized by Argelander (1972) with ref-
erence to the narcissistic neuroses, that it is, namely, important to 
concern oneself with the modality of the specific psychic processing. 
These considerations moved Argelander at that time to describe on 
the flier a character disorder which is associated with superficial and 
passing object relationships and less subjective involvement of feel-
ings. With regard to ADHD, there are similar challenges. Inasmuch, 
it is exceptionally important and helpful to precisely observe the case 
histories and treatments of children with the diagnosis of ADHD.
The neglecting of the sphere of emotions or, formulated in a dif-
ferent way, the loss of the meaning of emotionality, which is inher-
ent in this clinical picture, is still forced by therapeutic approaches 
which do not view the child as a whole.
Children with ADHD are—according to Balzer (2001)—the mar
ginalized avant garde of an increasingly sensory coded culture 

ADHD FROM THE EMPIRICAL AND CLINICAL PERSPECTIVES   151
with poor attachment security and deficient symbolizing and 
mentalizing. Thinking and reflection can veil within themselves 
a threat to land in a deep state of confusion and a state of being 
abandoned, which are prevented by the formation of autistic-con-
tiguous defences. The formation of autistic-contiguous defences is, 
according to Ogden (1989) the attempt to replace missing (physical) 
cohesion, for example, by rhythmic muscular activities. The motor 
hyperactivity appears, in this way, to create a sensory surface which 
serves the purpose of preventing the anxiety of falling into a deep 
hole of being alone and confused, observed and seen by no-one.
Alex gained something else in his therapy and for him a new experience—
he was seen.
Bibliography
Argelander, H. (1972). Der Flieger.  Suhrkamp Frankfurt/Main.
Balzer, W. (2001). Lust am Nichtdenken? Zum Verhältnis von Erregung 
und Bedeutung in beschleunigten und entgrenzten Lebenswelten.
Barkley, R.A. (1997). ‘Behavioral Inhibition, Sustained Attention, and 
Executive Functions: Constructing a Unifying Theory of ADHS’. Psy-
chological Bulletin , 121: 65–94.
Ben Amor, L., Grizenko, N. and Schwartz, G. et al. (2005). ‘Perinatal Com-
plications in Children with Attention-Defizit Hyperactivity Disorder 
and their unaffected Siblings’. Rev. Psychiat. Neurosci,  30 (2): 120–26.
Bion, W.R. (1962). Learning from Experience . London: Heinemann.
Dammasch, F. (2002). ‘Er weiß nicht, wo er anfängt und wo er aufhört!’ 
In: Bovensiepen, G., Hopf, H. and Molitor, G. (eds) Unruhige und 
unaufmerksame Kinder . Frankfurt: Brandes & Apsel.
DeBellis, M.D., Keshavan, M.S., Clark, D.B., Giedd J.N., Boring A.M., 
Frustaci, K. and Ryan, N.D. (1999b). ‘Developmental traumatology 
Part II: brain development’. Biological Psychiatry , 43: 1,271–84.
Desantis, A., Coster, W., Bigsby, R. and Lester, B. (2004). ‘Colic and Fuss-
ing in Infancy, and Sensory Processing at 3 to 8 Years of Age’. Infant 
Mental Health J. , 25 (6): 522–39.
Döpfner, M. and Lehmkuhl, G. (1997). ‘Von der kategorialen zur 
dimensionalen Diagnostrik. Prax Kinderpsychol’. Kinderpsychiat.  
46: 519–47.
Fonagy, P ., Gergeley, G., Jurist, E.J. and Target, M. (2004). Affektreguli-
erung, Mentalisierung und die Entwicklung des Selbst . Stuttgart: Klett-
Cotta.
Gilmore, K. (2000). ‘A Psychoanalytic Perspective on Attention-Deficit/
Hyperactivity Disorder’. J Am Psychoanal Assoc ., 48: 1,259–293.

152  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
Green, F. (1975). ‘Analytiker, Symbolisierung und Abwesenheit im 
Rahmen der psychoanalytischen Situation’. Psyche , 29: 503–40.
Hurry, A. (2002). ‘Psychoanalyse und Entwicklungstherapie’. In: 
Hurry, A. (Hrsg). Psychoanalyse und Entwicklungsförderung von 
Kindern . Frankfurt: Brandes & Apsel. pp. 43–89.
Jacobvitz, D., Hazen, N., Curran, M. and Hitchens, K. (2004). ‘Observa-
tions of Early Triadic Family Interactions: Boundary Disturbance in 
the Family Predict Symptoms of Depression, Anxiety, and Attention-
Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Middle Childhood’. Development 
and Psychopathology , 16: 577–92.
Kishiyama, M.M., Boyce, W.T., Jimenez, A.M., Perry, L.M. and 
Knight, R.T. (2008). ‘Socioeconomic Disparities Affect Prefrontal 
Function’. Children J Cogn Neurosci.
Levy, F., Hay, D.A., McStephen, M., Wood, C. and Waldman, I. 
(1997). ‘Leitlinie ADHS aus psychodynamischer Perspektive (noch 
unveröffentlicht)’. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiat ., 36 (6): 737–44.
Nunberg, H. (1959). Allgemeine Neurosenlehre.  Huber Stuttgart.
Ogden, T.H. (1989). ‘On the Concept of an Autistic-Contiguous Posi-
tion’. Int J. PsychoAnal.,  70: 127–40.
Rutter, M. (2002). ‘Nature, Nurture, and Development: From Evange-
lism through Science toward Policy and Practice’. Child Development , 
70 (1): 1–21.
Sandberg, S. (1996). ‘Hyperkinetic or Attention Deficit Disorder’. Brit. J. 
Psychiat.  169: 10–17.
Solnit, A.J. (1987). ‘A Psychoanalytic View of Play’. Psycho anal Stud 
Child . 42: 205–19.
Spitzer, M. (2002) ‘Editorial: Dopamin in der Wohngemeinschaft’. Ner-
venheilkunde , 4: 166–68.
Streeck-Fischer, A. (1997). ‘Verschiedene Formen des Spiels in der ana-
lytischen Psychotherapie ’. Forum Psychoanal.  13: 19–37.
Streeck-Fischer, A. (2006). ‘ “Neglekt” bei der Aufmerksamkeitsdefizit—
und Hyperaktivitätsstörung’. Psychotherapeut , 51: 80–90.
Streeck-Fischer, A. and Fricke, B. (2007). ‘Lieber unruhig sein, als 
in einem tiefen, dunklen Loch eingesperrt’. Prax. Kinderpsychol. 
Kinderpsychiat.  56: 277–302.
Taylor, E. (1995). ‘Syndromes of Attention-Deficit and Overactivity’. In: 
Rutter, M Taylor, E. and Hersov, L. (eds) Child and Adolescent Psychia-
try. Oxford: Blackwell Sciences. pp. 283–307.
Teicher, M.H., Andersen, S.L., Polcari, A., Anderso, C.M. and 
Navalta, C.M. (2002). ‘Developmental neurobioloy of childhood 
stress and trauma’. Psychiatric Clinic of North America , 25: 397–426.
Treurniet, M. (1995). ‘Was ist Psychoanalyse heute’. Psyche , 49: 111–40.

153CHAPTER FIVE
Further comments on Sophia’s mimetic 
autism, with special reference to Bion’s 
theory of thinking
Jorge L. Ahumada and Luisa C. Busch de Ahumada
Sophia’s clinical narrative has had an eventful journey, meeting 
different psychoanalytic outlooks and cultures. What follows 
is our attempt at a second look at some topics raised by our 
paper ‘From Mimesis to Agency: Steps in the Development of Psychic 
Two-ness’ (Busch de Ahumada and Ahumada, 2005), depicting the 
first eighteen months of treatment of a case of mimetic autism. Of 
the many valuable suggestions received we shall take special heed of 
Antonino’s Ferro’s comments to its Spanish version, putting forward 
a dialogue with a Bionian, and partly Meltzerian, conceptual frame. 
Given the current upsurge of autistic spectrum psychopathologies, 
our argument concerns the conceptual and technical tensions between 
the autism-derived Tustinian conceptual frame we put to work and 
the Kleinian and Bionian ones which in goodly part we share; but 
before going into such issues some historical notes seem necessary.
On the evolution of the concept ‘autism’
Autism is a term Eugen Bleuler coined in 1911 as part of the symp-
tomatic triad diagnostic for schizophrenia. It was brought to child 
psychiatry by Leo Kanner (1943) in his classic paper ‘Autistic 

154  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
Disturbances of Affective Contact’. There, and in a later paper 
written in 1951 after examining a hundred patients, he described 
what he considered a child psychosis starting before age two. He 
astutely noticed that the autistic child does not differentiate between 
himself/herself and others, between an ‘I’ and a ‘you’, highlighting 
the extreme autistic loneliness, an obsessive concern about preserva-
tion of the same in their routines, milieu, and relationships, echola-
lia, and a neat deficit in spontaneous activity; he also noted an able 
handling of objects, a phenomenal memory for unconnected data, 
and as concerns language, either mutism or a type of language that 
was not put at the service of interpersonal communication. Such 
children resist education (lived as dire intrusion). The title of the 
1951 paper, ‘The Conception of Wholes and Parts in Early Infantile 
Autism’, relates centrally with our present interests: as he puts it, 
for the autistic child the whole must be preserved in its entirety, the 
totality of the experience coming to the child from the outside must 
be reiterated, and the slightest change of arrangement, even those 
which are hardly perceived by others, may evoke a violent outburst 
of rage; the behaviour of the autistic child differs from ordinary 
obsessive ritualism in that they force the people in their world to 
behave even more obsessively than they do themselves. Independ-
ently, in 1944 Hans Asperger described a similar syndrome, which 
differs in that language is preserved and people with the syndrome 
often show surprising abilities. To this date the official US psychiat-
ric classification, the DSM-IV , admits both clinical pictures and adds 
two others, the Attention Deficit Disorder (ADD) and the Attention 
Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), which taken together come 
now to be known as the ‘autistic spectrum’.
Within the psychoanalytic literature the term came to the forefront 
with Margaret Mahler’s classic paper ‘Autism and Symbiosis: Two 
Extreme Disturbances of Identity’ in 1958. However, its Budapest 
roots are obvious enough, and it fell upon another Hungarian analyst 
migrated to the US, Therese Benedek, to firstly speak of the mother–
child ‘primary unit’. Interestingly, although Melanie Klein had 
trained for years in Budapest, she made no space for the Ferenczian 
idea of an initial psychic fusion of the child with its mother, and 
gave no place to autism in her painstaking enquiry of childhood 
disturbances: thus the concepts of ‘autism’ and ‘symbiosis’ are not 
part of the Kleinian conceptual framework. Although post-Kleinian 

FURTHER COMMENTS ON SOPHIA’S MIMETIC AUTISM   155
authors such as Donald Metzler explored autism at length, this did 
not change such basic Kleinian conceptual bearings.
It fell upon an analysand of Wilfred Bion, Frances Tustin, to clearly 
distinguish the dynamics of childhood autism from those of child-
hood psychoses. After some three decades of research on autism, 
in her 1986 paper ‘Thoughts on Psychogenic Autism with Special 
Reference to a Paper by Melanie Klein’ Tustin revised at more than 
a half-century distance Melanie Klein’s classic ‘The Importance of 
Symbol Formation in the Development of the Ego’, which had been 
published in 1930, this is, a dozen years before Kanner’s description 
of early infantile autism. Tustin points out that Klein registers sub-
stantial differences between her patient Dick and the schizophrenic 
children she had analysed, noting that such cases are often classi-
fied as mental deficiency, that Dick was largely devoid of affects and 
only rarely displayed anxiety and then only in an abnormally small 
degree, and that ‘against the diagnosis of dementia precox is the fact 
that the essential feature of Dick’s case was an inhibition  in devel-
opment and not a regression ’ (quoted by Tustin 1986: 50; emphasis 
in original). She also registers substantial differences from Klein’s 
usual technique: Klein acknowledges that she does not interpret the 
material until it has found expression in various representations but 
in this case, where the capacity to represent was almost entirely lack-
ing, she was obliged to interpret on the basis of her general knowl-
edge (Tustin, 1986: 52–53). Tustin highlights that in the schizophrenic 
child the processes of projective identification are quite active and 
we find a contact with the awareness of an inside and an outside, 
jointly with an acknowledgement of objects distinct from himself/
herself, while the autistic child connects with sensations rather than 
with objects as such, feeling continuous with the world rather than 
separate from it. Living as he or she does in a state of imitative 
fusion with objects in the outside world, Tustin (1986: 55) insists that 
a primal sense of ‘me-ness’ has to be well-established before long-
standing awareness of the ‘not-me’ can be tolerated. The result is an 
extreme vulnerability, where behind the apparent imperviousness 
the child’s energies focus on generating a protective covering of ‘me’ 
sensations in order to keep off the threatening ‘not-me’.
Her clinical research brought Tustin to partly revise the Kleinian 
conceptual frame she had used up to that time, taking support in the 
work of Ferenczi’s heir at Budapest Imre Hermann in what concerns 

156  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
the emotional turbulence coming up in the ‘crisis-of-two-ness’ 
which takes place when the child comes to contact the terrifying 
‘not-me’. The ensuing changes in conceptual understanding were 
in no way restricted to children or even to autism proper. The title 
of Tustin’s final books, Autistic Barriers in Neurotic Patients  (1986), 
and The Protective Shell in Children and Adults  (1990), are witness to 
the current widening in the understanding of autistic dynamics to 
neurotic patients and in the case of Gaddini (1984) of the expansion 
of autistic-mimetic dynamics to the understanding of social proc-
esses. Having posited twenty years ago the presence of an autistic 
level of the personality (Ahumada, 1986) our effort strives to enlarge 
the Kleinian conceptual frame taking as a point of departure the 
Budapest notion of an initial ‘me’–‘not-me’ indifferentiation, as has 
been done by Tustin, Gaddini, and Sydney Klein, and in the steps of 
Margaret Mahler by José Bleger. Of course in case one does take the 
Freudian notion of ‘primary identification’ as meaning a ‘primary 
identicity’ between the child and their mother then the differences 
between the Freudian and the Ferenczian frames iron out; such a 
view can be borne out by Freud’s ‘Leonardo’ paper (1910) as well as 
by his later assertion in ‘The Ego and the Id’, to the effect of that ‘At 
the very beginning, in the individual’s primitive oral phase, object-
cathexis and identification are no doubt indistinguishable from each 
other’ (1923: 29).
Anyhow, Melanie Klein’s path-breaking research on the infantile 
psychoses and neuroses assumed an initial distinctiveness between 
ego and object, projective identification becoming the central link 
between the child’s mind and their objects. However, such a model 
does not seem to make enough place for the issues of attaining tol-
erance for self-object differentiation—in Tustin’s terms, of attaining 
psychic two-ness—which play such a huge role in the autistic spec-
trum disorders and which our clinical material on Sophia purports 
to illustrate in detail. Following Ferenczian lines, to Tustin the baby’s 
body flows into its mother’s, and perception of discontinuity can 
usher in psychic catastrophe. Therefore, as Renata Gaddini (1995) 
beautifully puts it, the baby confronts two paradoxically opposite 
tendencies: it tends to continue being at-one with the mother in a 
state of fusion, while at the very same time it exists as a separate 
person, outside or even against her. From the 1970s on, Eugenio 
and Renata Gaddini have studied the precursor object , the thumb or 
pacifier or any nipple-like object, which being felt as ‘ me’, or as the 

FURTHER COMMENTS ON SOPHIA’S MIMETIC AUTISM   157
‘breast’; ‘me’ and ‘breast’ being at this early stage the same thing for 
the baby re-establishes continuity and cohesion. Imitation belongs at 
such a level, and failures involve the agonies of loss of self.
Our work with Sophia attempts to expand Tustin’s work on the 
working through of primary loss and emotional and intellectual dif-
ferentiation, and the attainment of psychic two-ness as an essential 
component of psychic growth and development. It centrally purports 
to expand the concept of the precursor object: instead of limiting it to 
the ‘contact’ issues of the thumb and the pacifier in the initial stages 
where bodily union of mouth and nipple abolishes separation, our 
clinical material will highlight fusional contact with the maternal 
object at the level of the dynamics of the gaze, a dynamics which 
extends in time well beyond the earliest stages vehicling in a rather 
obvious fashion the agonies of loss of self and the ensuing paralysis 
of the processes of symbol formation and then of psychic growth.
Before passing on to consider the clinical narrative, it must be sig-
nalled that the present understanding of autistic and mimetic dynam-
ics goes quite beyond Kanner’s description of early infantile autism. 
In our view such dynamics form a conceptual tripod with neurotic 
and psychotic dynamics, on an even keel with them. This idea was 
put forward already a decade ago by André Green in a cover note of 
a memorial book in tribute to Frances Tustin, edited by Theodore and 
Judith Mitrani (1997), stating that ‘Tustin influenced not only those 
interested in the specific problems of autistic states but also those 
who shared an intuition that autism could play the role of a new 
paradigm for the study of the mind.’ Such a perspective is propelled 
by the current changes in psychopathology, given that paediatricians 
and psychiatrists are startled by the increase in the incidence of autis-
tic pathologies. While Kanner (2004) estimated the incidence of early 
infantile autism at 1 in 10,000, presently Christakis et al.  (2004) con-
sider on the basis of the current bibliography that between 4 and 12% 
of children in the US are affected by ADHD, which has become nowa-
days the foremost affection in infancy, being found more frequently 
than child neuroses and of course more often than child psychoses.
Highlights in Sophia’s clinical narrative
For motives of space and pertinence we shall introduce the case and 
then bring up some steps in the clinical process which are relevant 
to the conceptual issues examined.

158  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
Sophia came into treatment at age 3 years 10 months at the 
prompting of the grandmother; up to then she had been rather ten-
derly accepted by the family as a ‘dummy’, being unable to solve 
problems designed for 18-month babies. Her history was unremark-
able except that it evinced no trace of a transitional object. She did 
not recognize colours, was unable to count, took no initiatives on 
her own, and did not choose between proposals, responding, ‘I don’t 
know,’ as a cliché. An older brother was her translator and inter-
preter of the world, grasping what was meant behind her speech 
and her wishes much better than the parents. At the kindergarten 
she followed another girl in all activities; although to her teacher she 
was ‘a lovely’, never a bother, it was soon noticed that she did not 
act on her own or achieve basic goals. That maternal mind-blindness 
was an issue comes up neatly in her stating that she did not sing or 
talk to Sophia when she was a baby ‘because, anyhow, babies do not 
understand’. Her vocabulary was restricted to some 20–25 words, 
most of them mispronounced except for ‘mum’, ‘dad’, ‘water’, and 
some few others.
In the initial interviews play was poor and stereotyped, with no dis-
tinction of individualities, no attribution of names or roles, no agenda, 
and no process. She would, for instance, haphazardly align dolls or 
animals, serially feed them ‘ opa’ (soup), clean their mouths with a 
napkin equally serially, or undress them all and make them serially 
pee. At times her face brightened up, her gaze seeking the analyst’s 
(LBA), expecting her to take initiatives. A twice-weekly treatment was 
agreed upon; after the first vacation a third session was added.
The initial sessions often went on without a word on her side. 
In the first months repetitive games and drawings went on and on 
with few variants: her drawings of human figures were sometimes 
more or less organized, at other times just a haphazard collection 
of dissembled parts, in the manner of mechanically ‘copied’ rem-
nants coming out of nowhere. Once she came accompanied by her 
elder brother; she asked for him to stay in session, which she had 
never asked for her mother to do. This led to a totally synchronized 
scene where her brother talked and she adoringly repeated in eco 
the last syllables; samely whenever Sophia talked the brother went 
into simultaneous translation.
Her clinging to the analyst’s gaze became more evident after the 
third month, constantly seeking the analyst’s eyes for approval. She 

FURTHER COMMENTS ON SOPHIA’S MIMETIC AUTISM   159
become vital or she crumbled down depending on whether or not 
I sustained her gaze. In this frame came her first fit of rage in session: 
after several interchanges with her puppets saying of some, such as 
a tiger, that they were friendly, that they all looked at her, she threw 
an old man/witch to the ground saying that it did not look at her, 
picked it up and threw it again with all her might, repeating that 
it did not look at her and that it was bad. Such a display of fury 
rescued her from crumbling down; later, when the analyst exam-
ined the old man/witch puppet she realized that its eyes were in 
fact almost closed.
A session in the fifth month of treatment dramatically illustrates 
the place of the dynamics of the gaze in helping to eventually attain 
a tolerance for the ‘me’–‘not-me’ distinction. She came into session 
in a happy mood, the analyst greeted her and asked her how she 
was, and for the first time she responded ‘ Bem’ (well). Sitting in their 
identical small chairs in front of each other she looked expectantly at 
the analyst’s eyes. The analyst realized that Sophia’s posture exactly 
mirrored hers, noting that she copied her own posture; she decided 
to wait. When the analyst moved slightly Sophia seemed to lose her 
support, her gaze veiled, and she started collapsing; she looked at 
the floor and then again at the analyst, this time with dull eyes. The 
analyst vividly felt that Sophia was her marionette, held by strings 
to her eyes, depending for her very existence on being held alive 
by her gaze, and then felt it necessary to modulate the tension, ask-
ing, ‘But what are we doing?’ Sophia’s eyes brightened, seemingly 
waiting for a proposal by the analyst; as this was not forwarded, 
again her gaze roamed the floor. Again the analyst waited, feeling 
that this would be the only way for Sophia to take initiatives on 
her own; tension was in the air. After three or four minutes Sophia 
looked at the analyst, who smiled but did not speak: her gaze went 
slowly over the analyst’s face and then her hands. At that point the 
analyst said that it seemed to her that Sophia cannot think of what 
to do because she gets afraid to do so and thus has to wait for the 
analyst to tell her. Sophia stood up, her face glowing, and went to 
her case saying that she was going to take the puppet out; this she 
did, and she approached smiling, saying, ‘Hello.’ Addressing the 
puppet, the analyst said, ‘Hello, how are you doing?’ and Sophia 
answered, ‘I don’t know.’ The analyst asked the puppet for her name 
and Sophia responded, ‘Lola’, for the first time giving a proper name 

160  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
(Lola is the name of the girl at the kindergarten that she followed 
everywhere). Asked what she was going to do, she said—still talk-
ing as if she were the puppet—that she was going to draw.
Sitting the puppet on the table, and now apparently speaking for 
herself rather than on behalf of the puppet, she said that she was 
going to draw Lola, the head, the hand, the foot, the nose; the ana-
lyst mentioned that Lola had decided to draw and now Sophia is 
drawing also. She seemed to reflect on this, drew some hair around 
a head, and said, ‘It’s mum,’; then she said, ‘It’s Iago’ (her younger 
brother), drawing his hair more and more forcibly and then scratch-
ing his face so strongly that she broke the pencil’s point. The analyst 
told her that after drawing Mum and Santiago she had grown angry 
with Santiago, perhaps wanting to be mother’s little baby. Nodding 
in agreement she ripped the sheet to pieces, and thereafter drew 
in each little piece a small Santiago, which she then cut to pieces. 
The analyst told her that she might be afraid that Mum might have 
more babies. Sophia put the bits together and threw them into the 
wastebasket, taking care to pick up each small piece from the floor 
and then looked triumphantly at the analyst. Emphasizing the term 
‘drawn’, the analyst told her that now she feels that she can throw 
the little drawn Santiagos into the bin.
A few minutes later she recapitulated at a tactile body level the 
‘not-me’–‘me’ discrimination that shortly before had taken place at 
the level of the gaze. She drew Santiago again and asked the analyst 
to draw her mother, which she did; she again drew a very small 
Santiago, took a small piece of adhesive tape, and asked the analyst, 
‘How does it go?’, meaning on which side the glue was. The ana-
lyst responded that she didn’t know as she was not touching it; she 
looked at the analyst fixedly, bewildered by the lack of a response. 
The analyst responded that she seemed to be afraid at finding out for 
herself. Amid strong tension, and still looking fixedly at the analyst’s 
eyes, seeking support, she touched the tape with her fingers without 
looking at it. Finally she looked at the piece of tape, unstuck it from 
her fingers, turned it around and stuck it over the small drawing of 
Santiago while saying softly, ‘ Así va ’ (thus it goes). She slowly and 
deliberately cut another little piece, touched it on both sides, and 
looked at the analyst; this sequence was repeated several times at 
an increasingly faster pace, and then she laughed. The analyst told 
her that she was glad at her realizing by herself how it goes. This 

FURTHER COMMENTS ON SOPHIA’S MIMETIC AUTISM   161
drawing of Santiago ‘immobilized’ by the Scotch tape was not cut to 
pieces; instead she kept it in her folder.
By the seventh month in treatment devitalization and crumbling 
had lessened, it was possible to engage in dialogue with her, and her 
vocabulary had expanded hugely. Notably, she had started confront-
ing and fighting her elder brother. On coming into one session in a 
good mood she constructed a house, putting some pillows against 
the desk legs, got into it, said that we must sleep, and asked the ana-
lyst to lie down in front of the ‘house’s door’: which the analyst did, 
saying that in such a way Sophia felt safe, like a baby in the mother’s 
belly. They then rested in silence for some time in what Tustin (1986: 
210) calls a ‘womblike communal situation’. Sophia then got out 
saying that she was going to draw the analyst, wrote the analyst’s 
‘name’ at the top of the sheet and ‘hers’ on a side, and thereafter in 
what seems to be a new episode of ‘me’–‘not-me’ discrimination, she 
copied many times the outline of her hand and the analyst’s hand; 
then she made a line with the green marker, said, ‘It’s Iago,’ started 
sticking the marker on it—‘Go off, go off, I don’t want Iago’—and 
angrily threw the sheet to the floor. She painted a finger green, and 
then painted all her fingers, until she ran out of paint; only when the 
paint became dried and cracked did she go to the lavatory to wash. 
Soon after she openly came to acknowledge that her cliché ‘I don’t 
know,’ was due to the fact that she didn’t want to think, suggest-
ing that instead of thinking they played a game where the analyst 
was the mother and she was her two-year-old daughter. In the next 
session, however, she reverted the roles: she played the mum who 
taught the analyst how to put together a puzzle.
A clinical fragment at the 14th month of treatment illustrates the 
emotional storms that can arise as a result of the differentiations 
entailed by symbol-formation. Sophia came in happy, as was already 
usual by this time, and engaged in a game where she was a doctor 
having a daughter called Caroline, while the analyst’s daughter had 
hurt her hand and had to be cured. Somehow she was not a doctor 
anymore, just the mother of Caroline; as the game seemed to be end-
ing she saw the blackboard, lit up, chose the ‘best’ chalk and said 
that she was going to write ‘Caroline’. Up to now on announcing that 
she would write she only made some scrawl, but she knew the let-
ters of her name, which in session she would use haphazardly. She 
asked the analyst to tell her how ‘Caroline’ was written, then copied 

162  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
laboriously the letters and asked whether it did say ‘Caroline’. When 
told ‘yes’ she was happy and asked the analyst to write something. 
The analyst wrote ‘Sophia’. Sophia looked at it and exclaimed, ‘I do 
not know how to read.’ Suddenly she lit up again and said in a sur-
prised tone ‘Sophia!’ The analyst told her ‘yes’ and then she wrote 
herself ‘So-phi-a’; she was quite happy and showed the analyst the 
numbers in a chart recognizing them correctly from zero to nine. 
After doing this something both intense and startling took place. She 
had been happy and loose until she realized all that she had done by 
herself: she then became anguished, her gaze turned opaque, and she 
went into a full-blown crisis of two-ness in the manner of a temper 
tantrum. She violently turned around whatever was in her toy box, 
then got on all fours and went around the office barking. The analyst 
asked what had happened, and said that it seems that when she real-
izes that she knows how to do things then she gets afraid. Sophia sat 
on the floor, looked at the analyst very seriously and possibly sadly, 
and with a small voice asked, ‘Can we play that I am a small baby and 
you are my mum?’ The analyst told her that it seemed that she got 
scared of being independent and so had to come back, even if only 
playing, to be a baby having a mother who cares for her, and who 
takes charge of everything. She listened, looked around, and insisted, 
‘Come, play.’ At this time was heard the voice of her small brother in 
the waiting room, coming with the mother to fetch her: Sophia said, 
‘Mum has come,’ and took off. On arriving there the analyst found 
her sitting on her small brother’s pram, looking at her triumphantly—
perhaps also mockingly—as if to say, ‘Look where I am.’
We closed our clinical narrative at this point, Sophia having 
attained a delightful spontaneity. Indeed, the family commented on 
how lively she had become.
About our conceptual comments
On Sophia’s broad diagnosis suffice it to say that she amply 
complies with the requirements established by the DSM-IV for the 
diagnosis of ‘autistic disorder’. Of the diagnostic categories Tustin 
described, Sophia is not a shell-type, encapsulated autist, nor an 
entangled, schizophrenic-like one: she is, as her family put it, a conviv-
ial, attractive, submissive, ‘dummy’. Mahler’s notion that symbiotic 
psychoses may go into a secondary autism (Mahler et al. , 1975) does 

FURTHER COMMENTS ON SOPHIA’S MIMETIC AUTISM   163
not fit either, because no psychosis can be said to be present: here 
we find, as Tustin (1988: 103–104) finds in autism, ‘very little mind’, 
a void of fantasies, and an obstructed transference. As we see it, the 
mimetic/symbiotic component is the healthier part of her psyche 
opening the way to analytic progress. Also, here deficit and conflict 
are to our mind intertwined and, importantly, it is in the access to 
conflict immediately following an emotionally holding link—the 
‘context of togetherness’—that progress is made. Much, if not most, 
of such holding initially happens within a mimetic transference mir-
roring with the maternal object, this being why we describe her case 
as a ‘mimetic autism’. In our understanding, overtly autistic phenom-
ena and mimesis correspond to polar moments of the structure.
Some degree of pathological symbiosis may likely have been 
enacted with the mother; what is observable, however, is the mimetic 
entente with her elder brother as her overall world interpreter, then 
that with her friend Lola as her leader and interpreter at the kinder-
garten, and finally with her analyst in the transference. In fact, it was 
mind-blindness as a parasitic component of the pathological symbio-
sis that, after an initial period of rather absent-minded rambling and 
perseverations in session, came firstly to the forefront in Sophia’s 
enacting on her dolls the mind-blind, mechanical mother—her iden-
tification with the stronger victorious opponent, to use Ferenczi’s 
(1932) term. Thereafter and increasingly, a mimetic transference rela-
tional frame came to be established, mainly at the level of the gaze 
and eye-to-eye contact with the analyst, with Sophia continuing in 
such a frame to handle the dolls and animals serially, with no indi-
vidual distinctions. Moments of a ‘context of togetherness’ (Tustin, 
1986: 303) started to evolve.
We mentioned before Eugenio and Renata Gaddini’s (1995) con-
cept of the precursor object, this is, the object of primary identifica-
tion sustaining the baby’s imageless illusion that he/she is mother 
and the mother is baby, with no differentiation of inner and outer: at 
this stage failure precipitates the agonies of self-loss; also, our exten-
sion of the concept to the dynamics of the gaze. Upon what we can 
clinically discern, a significant step occurred after about three months 
of therapy, whereby she constantly sought the analyst’s gaze for her 
approval and depended on her recognition for liveliness or dejection; 
additionally she started greeting the analyst in a friendly manner by 
way of the tiger puppet. Coincidentally, there emerges a split of two 

164  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
psychic universes, those of her friendly good objects—those looking 
at her granting recognition—and persecutory bad ones, the man/
witch that withholds recognition by not looking at her.
A further step in the evolution of the gaze as precursor object 
in the transference towards transitionality by the way of the crisis-
of-twoness comes up in the scene at five months of treatment. By 
this time the link to the analyst has become more resilient, and 
Sophia responds ‘well’ to her greeting. The effort at visual fusion 
mirroring herself on the analyst posture is obvious, as are her tak-
ing the analyst as the source of all initiatives and an agonizing ten-
sion when guidance is not provided. Mention of her fears of her 
own thinking and her dependence on the analyst’s initiatives help 
Sophia act on her own, including attributing to her puppet for the 
first time a proper name, ‘Lola’, the name of her mimetic partner 
at the kindergarten. Then she draws her mother and immediately 
her younger brother; she attacks her brother’s image first with 
the pencil, and thereafter by tearing the sheets to pieces and care-
fully throwing the pieces into the wastebasket. (As we can see in 
several scenes, side by side with differentiation from the analyst/
mother, her baby brother Santiago comes up as a main persecutory 
object whom she attacks.) A new drawing of the mother and a very 
small Santiago follow, which is continued by the far-reaching scene 
with the bit of Scotch tape, with the—to Sophia—stunning finding 
that the analyst cannot know which side of the tape the glue is on 
given that she does not touch it. Sophia thereby starts to differenti-
ate her own actions from the analyst’s initiatives, and presumably 
her own body from the analyst/mother’s, in what amounts to a 
definite eureka process of discovery, which she studiously repeats 
several times.
Additional steps in discerning herself from the primary identifica-
tion enacted with the analyst, marking the step-by-step, resistance-
plagued, and laborious passage from use of the analyst as precursor 
object to her being used transitionally on the way to separateness comes 
up at six months of treatment, just after the summer holidays. There 
she ascribes the analyst a name which she ‘writes’ in her copy-cat man-
ner. Painting her own fingers and hands as a way of differentiating her 
own body and actions from the mother’s unspontaneity seemed to 
be part of her process of self-discovery. Contact with spontaneity and 
bodily separateness brings in a tirade of stunts while brandishing her 

FURTHER COMMENTS ON SOPHIA’S MIMETIC AUTISM   165
cliché slogan ‘I don’t know.’ However, her voicing ‘I don’t know, you 
say it, I don’t want to think,’ shows that she can now think further 
about her cliché. Thereafter she transparently dramatizes the motive 
for her anti-thought stance, asking that the analyst be the mother and 
she her two-year-old daughter, and openly asking for milk.
Leaping forward now to the session in the fourteenth month of ther-
apy, we find it retraces at a higher level of self-discrimination and sym-
bol formation the processes and huge resistances observed at the fifth 
month of treatment. In the ‘doctor’ game, as the mother of her daughter 
Caroline, she suddenly spotted the blackboard, lit up, asked the analyst 
how the name ‘Caroline’ was written and carefully copied its letters. In 
this emotional context, when the analyst then wrote ‘Sophia’, she came 
for the first time to really read her name, and then to write it. Emotional 
turmoil and enacted regression again followed on the eureka discovery, 
including massive muscular discharge, her going on all fours, and her 
acting the barking dog. She soon, however, was able to regain contain-
ment at the level of play, asking the analyst to ‘come, play’.
The shift towards transitionality of phenomena in the analytic 
space and expansion in Sophia’s personal space coincided with a 
lessening of persecutory anxieties. As Christmas neared, the once 
intensely persecutory old man/witch, which she had thrown to the 
floor in a fit of fury because he did not look at her, came to be included 
in the play/celebration, metamorphosed into a Santa Claus.
To end this clinical presentation we must emphasize that its focus 
resides on the transference installation of the analyst as precursor 
object and the evolution of the analytic link towards the predomi-
nance of mimetic and then transitional phenomena in the road to 
two-ness and, in Alvarez’s (1995: 242) terms, to agency over one’s 
mind: on what might be called the ‘work of two-ness’. Discovery 
of separateness and spontaneity, the accomplishment of symbol-
formation and the access to agency over one’s mind, ushers in emo-
tional turbulence, because progress in the work of two-ness involves 
renouncement of unity at the level of the mimetic link.
On the need to expand Bion’s theory of thinking 
to account for autistic-mimetic dynamics
Of the various comments to our earlier paper (Busch de Ahumada 
and Ahumada, 2005), we shall single out for its relevance Antonino 

166  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
Ferro’s (2007) commentary to its Spanish translation. Generously, he 
deems the paper important on several accounts:
1. because it puts to the fore the issue of the psychoanalytic approach 
to autism at a time when it is being widely contested;
2. because it shows an analyst that does not evade the profoundest 
level of psychic suffering, managing to conduct Sophia towards a 
level of psychic normalcy in a relatively brief time span; and
3. because it engages in an exquisitely psychoanalytic manner the 
deepest level of psychic life: autism and stupidity as a defence, 
whereby its value reaches beyond child analysis into the deep 
functioning of adult analyses.
At a more conceptual level, Ferro offers considering, on the side of 
the author’s model which he finds coherent, agreeable, and rich in 
results, another model or perhaps another language, inspired by 
Bion’s ideas.
The state of indistinct sensoriality includes proto-emotive 
states which need to find the reverie  of a receptive mind so that, 
passing from reception to transformation, it allows progres-
sive alpha-betization of sensoriality. By this process, beta-elements  
(sensoriality—proto-emotions) are transformed into alpha-elements , 
this is, into emotive pictograms giving place to the development of 
wakeful dream-thoughts which is at the base of a capacity for think-
ing, feeling, and dreaming. In the absence of such a process, or due to 
a negative or reversed reverie , the most diverse defences come up, the 
most extreme of which being autism, which empties itself not only 
of alpha-elements but also of the apparatus to produce them; this is, 
it empties itself of the alpha-function  with bi-dimensionalization of 
the mind. Stupidity and flattening are extreme defences erected to 
avoid everything being destroyed by the tsunami of beta-elements.
In bi-dimensionality, he says, we find a sort of undifferenti-
ated fog where everything turns indistinguishable and there is no 
emotional thickness, a kind of dyslexia of the emotions, if not an 
alexia, which does not allow them to be perceived nor discriminated 
consequent of a lack of the transforming reception of the maternal 
alpha-function .
If things go well, we are on the road from the clouds of sensoriality 
to the emotive pictograms. We find then that it is possible to discern 

FURTHER COMMENTS ON SOPHIA’S MIMETIC AUTISM   167
the different emotional states, and thereby to give a name to and to 
contain the emotions, this is, to gain access to consciousness (Sophia) 
which in the first place is being conscious of oneself and our internal 
world. In the absence of such a road we will find ‘-Sophia’ (-K) lead-
ing to an unknowing of oneself and to any possibility of deciphering 
the internal world (impoverished by emptying or evacuation), and 
the external world (invaded by projective identifications). Through 
her analyst, argues Ferro, Sophia meets for the first time a capacity 
for positive reverie, someone that can psychically perceive her, that 
can be on the same wavelength ( at-one ), that is able to receive her 
communicational fragments and complete them (alpha-betization 
processes); but, specially, someone who is not afraid of proto-emotive 
states: her analyst can accept to be dirtied by emotive stains because 
she is aware of having a way for removing such stains (this is, to 
receive, contain, and transform proto-emotive states). Dirtiness (the 
mass of beta-elements  that do not scare the analyst) samely as the 
tiger, the furies, can be accepted because the analyst has the instru-
ments to accept and transform them. Also, the analyst is sensitive to 
the emotional voltage that Sophia is able to tolerate (the personified 
game, Lola), so that such personifications allow for the transit from 
emotional indifferentiation to a capacity to individualize the diverse 
emotional states. We assist, holds Ferro, to the feminine development 
through the analyst’s ability to be receptive and let herself be pene-
trated by the girl’s emotions: the analyst knows that she has to attain 
alpha-function  (lavabo function) so that trust can be established. At 
the end of the alphabetization process the child can read her name as 
well as the numbers from 1 to 10. Also, the child now has a separate 
identity. The analyst is unafraid of emotional violences, knowing 
their importance for psychic evolution, and is able to contain and 
transform them: which allows her to vehicle to the child the method 
to contain and ‘cook’ her emotions with no need to fall into terror or 
camouflage herself in indifferentiation or stupidity.
We have quoted at length from Dr. Ferro’s exquisitely thought-
ful comment in order to build the background for our response. We 
must now thank him for providing the stimulus for an examination 
of Bion’s theory of thinking made from the standpoint of Sophia’s 
clinical narrative: in other words, for a comparison between the 
conceptual model Bion built upon his clinical work with adult 
schizophrenic patients, and what emerges from the clinical process 

168  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
of childhood mimetic autism. We coincide in that stupidity and 
emotional flattening attempt to hold off what is felt to be an emo-
tional tsunami and that in the terrain of ‘two-dimensionality’ (to use 
Metzler’s [1975] terms) we find, as Ferro (2007: 850) puts it, ‘a sort of 
undifferentiated fog where everything turns indistinguishable and 
lacks emotional thickness’. The lack of emotional thickness results in 
our view from what Ferenczi (1924) called autotomy , the emotional 
dematerialization as a consequence of cumulative trauma.
We will take as a point of departure for our discussion the 
Bionian term ‘alpha-betization’ that Ferro uses, which to us covers 
some issues—but only some—of what takes place in this psycho-
analytic process. In our view, our communicational tool is not in the 
beginnings, nor perhaps fundamentally, verbal language; as Freud 
(1913: 161) puts it, quoting Goethe’s Faust , ‘in the beginning was the 
Deed’, and given that emotionally relevant deeds take place within 
a relationship, this may be alternatively put as: ‘in the beginning is 
the relationship’. In Ferenczian terms it might be stated that achiev-
ing a verbal language that is valid for communication with others 
is possible for the autistic child only inasmuch as the emotions that 
had been dematerialized by a lack of adequate responses along 
his development (in Ferro’s terms, by negative reverie) can come 
to be ‘re-materialized’ in the session. And we coincide also in that 
the road towards ‘alpha-betization’ often involves traversing strong 
emotional turbulence which in the clinical material presented tends 
to take the form of the crisis-of-two-ness.
Let’s attempt to pinpoint an aspect of the task that in our opin-
ion does not adequately fit into the Bionian idea of reverie. These 
patients, as Kanner noted in the early fifties, do not distinguish 
between a ‘me’ and a ‘not-me’, and thereby between an ‘I’ and a 
‘you’: to attain such a distinction is an essential part of the psycho-
analytic task. We must achieve on the one hand a function of contact  
and holding  (the dimension of reverie, the at-one ), and, on the other 
hand, we must achieve also a function of delimitation , it being indis-
pensable for arriving at a tolerance of the discrimination of the ana-
lyst as part of the ‘not-me’. It does not suffice to bear the paradox, as 
Winnicott (1971) assumed, because in case me–you discrimination 
is not achieved the analyst would continue to be indiscriminately 
co-opted as internal to what the child deems to be ‘me’. It happens, 
however, that as we approach discrimination of the analyst as part 

FURTHER COMMENTS ON SOPHIA’S MIMETIC AUTISM   169
of a ‘not-me’, we unavoidably also approach the violences of the 
crisis-of-two-ness.
Accesing delimitation requires a measure of confrontational slant 
of the analyst’s actions and/or verbalizations whenever the issues 
of me–you distinction come to the fore, which becomes notorious in 
the dramatic scene at the fifth month of treatment, in which the girl 
mirrors in a strictly mimetic manner the analyst’s posture, and the 
analyst decides to keep such a posture. As a result, the girl manages 
to make conscious contact with the corporeal mimesis with which 
she was sustaining herself emotionally, which in turn leads such 
mimesis towards fracture. We are then witness to a transformational 
cycle in the passage from mimetic mirroring  to the emergence of a self-
interpretive space  as concerns a relationship, which is initially mute: 
following her collapse and after three or four minutes the girl looks 
at the analyst, the analyst smiles at her but does not speak, the girl’s 
gaze examines the analyst’s face and hands, the analyst points out 
that thinking by herself seems to scare her, and then, in front of a 
question that the analyst poses, after seeking a puppet and speaking 
‘from’ the puppet, the child for the first time poses a proper name, 
‘Lola’. Some measure of tolerance to a discrimination of the ‘me’ and 
the ‘not-me’, this is, of the self and object as two distinct terms in the 
relationship, comes up in this sequence as a requisite first step in the 
way to an acknowledgement of individuals and their nomination, 
namely for ‘alpha-betization’.
What seems to be the most difficult clinical point to investigate 
and conceptualize is the relation between the functions of contact and 
holding in the at-one , and the functions of delimitation and insight, 
which depend on each other inasmuch as that only in the context 
of the at-one  can a tolerance for psychic pain and for the emotional 
turbulence accompanying the ‘me’–‘not-me’ discrimination be built 
up. Dependence on at-one  togetherness of the ‘me’–‘not-me’ delimi-
tation and the resultant opening up to genuine symbol-formation 
seems to happen not only in the sequence just described but in 
other sequences also, such as, and perhaps foremostly, in the scene 
of intra-uterine communion after the first vacation, which is fol-
lowed by a crucial progress inasmuch as Sophia arrives to realize, 
and to verbally express, that she does not want to think. We con-
sider this dependence on the communion of the at-one  as being due 
to the issue that fusional ‘wholes’ are teared apart by the processes 

170  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
of thought. In any case, the clinical material presented shows that 
moments of ego integration and symbol-formation in turn lead to 
emotional turbulence, as is most notably present in the session at 
14 months of treatment, after realizing that for the first time she has 
written ‘So-phi-a’.
A comment on the term ‘sensoriality’, which Bion takes as the 
socle of his theory of thinking. The term comes from philosophy: 
Descartes ontically opposed psychism as what is properly human, 
this is the reasoning mind ( cogitatio ) and conscious will, to a purely 
mechanical sensoriality belonging, samely as affects, to what is 
merely animal in man, and thereby mechanical in the strong sense 
of this term. The impact of Descartes was widely felt on both sides 
of the Channel: as a foremost Cartesian scholar, John Cotting-
ham (1986: xxxvii) reminds us that not only the philosophers on 
the Continent but also Locke, Berkeley, and Hume in the British 
islands ‘bear the unmistakable imprint of Descartes’ thought con-
cerning the structure of human knowledge, the nature of the mind 
and the relationship between mind and matter’. In the philosophy 
of consciousness sensoriality is opposite to the properly psychic. 
But, how can ‘sensoriality’ be clinically distinguished from the pri-
mordial psyche, from what Bion himself calls the proto-emotive 
and the proto-mental? In our clinical material we have been wit-
ness to Sophia’s self-differentiation from the analyst as it evolves 
in the very same fifth-month session through different sensorial 
modalities: at the level of the gaze and soon after at at a tactile 
level with the piece of Scotch tape. But what matters there is not 
the ‘sensoriality’ as such but the psychic evolutions transcurring 
thereby. So it might be preferable for our domain to leave the term 
‘sensoriality’ aside as a mere philosophical—and if one so wishes, 
psycho-physiological—abstraction. The situation is different, given 
that they can be pinpointed clinically well enough, in the case of 
concepts such as ‘auto-sensuality’ (Tustin, 1986: 59) or ‘mimetic 
identicity’ with an other not acknowledgeable as such, which are 
both at the service of obviating contact with the ‘not-me’.
In our view the terms ‘relationship’ and ‘indifferentiation’ do 
not oppose each other at the level of primordial psychic stages. 
This can again be exemplified by the scene at the fifth month of 
treatment where the girl’s mimetic mirroring sustained itself by 
her ‘hanging’ from the analyst’s gaze; this shows that mimetic 

FURTHER COMMENTS ON SOPHIA’S MIMETIC AUTISM   171
identicity and relationship go well hand-in-hand. Also, that we 
hold that the capacity for a ‘me’–‘not-me’ distinction is not found 
at the level of primordial psychism in no way goes against our con-
sidering the presence of an initial ego, given that from the start 
the baby undergoes affects and anxieties, and builds upon them in 
their experiences.
In our view the clinical material presented and, more amply, 
experience with the treatment of children in the autistic spectrum 
range, requires an extension of Bion’s theory of thinking in order to 
make a distinct place for the daunting issues of self-primal object 
differentiation, with their attending pain and turbulence. This 
is to say, it needs to be extended to include the most primordial, 
pre-schizo-paranoid levels of mind where there is no distinction 
between baby and mother. Phenomena of self-primal object dif-
ferentiation are we think particularly explicit in the clinical course 
of the unfolding of Sopha’s mimetic autism, but we gather—and 
here again we agree with Ferro—that they apply in some manner 
or other to other clinical pictures and to adult patients. Such a two-
level model of mind, at a time fusional and schizo-paranoid from a 
certain point in development on, would likely help throw additional 
light on such controversial concepts as ‘primary envy’: acknowl-
edgement of the goodness of the object as goodness belonging to the 
object entails a surrender of fusional identicity, and thus entails the 
agonies and furies of self-loss.
Let us end with a hopeful note: three years after finishing her 
analysis Sophia is well advanced in elementary school, academically 
holding her place solidly in the middle of her class. Socially she is 
well regarded and has plenty of friends. This should tell something 
about the potency of the psychoanalytic approach to the autistic 
spectrum, when treatment begins early enough.
Bibliography
Ahumada, J.L. (1986). ‘Trauma, identification, evolution’. In: The Logics 
of the Mind. A Clinical View . London: Karnac. pp. 115–24.
Alvarez, A. (1995). ‘Verbal rituals in autism: the concept of autistic 
object and the countertransference’. In: Mitrani, T. and Mitrani, J.L. 
(eds) Encounters with Autistic States . Northvale NJ & London: Jason 
Aronson.

172  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
Busch de Ahumada, L.C. and Ahumada, J.L. (2005). ‘From mimesis to 
agency: Clinical steps in the work of psychic two-ness’. Int. J. Psycho-
anal.  86: 721–36.
(2007). El autismo: ¿un nuevo paradigma? Respuesta a los Dres. Velleda 
Cecchi, Antonino Ferro y Virginia Ungar. Revista de Psicoanálisis  64: 
863–72.
Christakis, D.A., Zimmerman, F.J., DiGiuseppe, D.L. and McCarthy, C.A. 
(2004). ‘Early television exposure and subsequent attentional prob-
lems in children’. Pediatrics , 113: 708–13.
Cottingham, J. (1986). ‘General introduction. The Meditations and 
Cartesian Philosophy’. In: Descartes, R. Meditations on First Phi-
losophy.  Ed. by J. Cottingham. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press. 
pp. xviii–xxxviii.
Ferenczi, S. (1980[1924]). Thalassa: A Theory of Genitality . London: 
Karnac.
Ferenczi, S. (1955[1932])., Notes and fragments’. In Final Contributions to 
the Problems and Methods of Psychoanalysis . London: Hogarth.
Ferro, A. (2007). ‘Comentario al trabajo “De la mimesis a la esponta-
neidad: Pasos en el trabajo de la separatidad psíquica”’. Revista de 
Psicoanálisis , 64: 849–51.
Freud, S. (1910). ‘Leonardo de Vinci and a memory of his childhood’. 
S.E., 11.
Freud, S. (1913). ‘Totem and taboo’. S.E.,  13.
Freud, S. (1923). ‘The ego and the id’. S.E., 19.
Gaddini, E. (1984). ‘Changes in psychoanalytic patients up to the present 
day’. In: Wallersten, R. S. (ed.) Changes in Analysts and their Training.  
IPA Monograph No. 4.
Gaddini, R. (1995). ‘From fear of change to mourning’. In: Mitrani, T. 
and Mitrani, J.L. (eds) Encounters with Autistic States . Northvale NJ & 
London: Jason Aronson.
Kanner, L. (1943). ‘Autistic disturbances of affective contact’. Nervous 
Child , 2: 217–50.
Kanner, L. (1951). ‘The conception of wholes and parts in early infantile 
autism’. Am. J. Psychiat. , 113: 23–26.
Mahler, M. (1958). ‘Autism and symbiosis, two extreme disturbances of 
identity’. Int. J. Psychoanal. , 39: 77–83.
Mahler, M., Pine, F. and Bergmann, A. (1975). The Psychological Birth 
of the Human Infant: Symbiosis and Individuation . New York: Basic 
Books.
Meltzer D. (1975). ‘Dimensionality as a parameter of mental function-
ing’. In: Meltzer D. et al. Explorations in Autism: A Psycho-Analytical 
Study . Pertshire, Clunie Press. pp. 223–38.

FURTHER COMMENTS ON SOPHIA’S MIMETIC AUTISM   173
Mitrani, T. and Mitrani, J. (eds) (1997). Encounters with Autistic States: 
A Memorial Tribute to Frances Tustin.  Northvale: N.J., Aronson.
Tustin, F. (1986). ‘Thoughts on psychogenic autism with special ref-
erence to a paper by Melanie Klein’. In Autistic Barriers in Neurotic 
Patients.  New Haven CT & London: Yale Univ. Press. pp. 48–66.
Tustin, F. (1988). ‘Psychotherapy with Children who Cannot Play’. Int. 
Rev. Psychoanal.  15: 93–105.
Tustin, F. (1990). The Protective Shell in Children and Adults.  London: 
Karnac.
Winnicott, D.W. (1994[1971]). Playing and Reality . London: Karnac.



175DISCUSSION OF JORGE L. AHUMADA 
AND LUISA C. BUSCH DE AHUMADA’S 
PAPER
Angela Joyce
This paper by Jorge L. Ahumada and Luisa C. Busch de 
Ahumada is implicitly motivated by the challenge from clini-
cal practice in child psychiatry that has seen a hitherto unex-
plained explosion, frequently noted in the professional literature 
and popular press, in the numbers of children who are diagnosed 
with so-called autistic spectrum disorders (ASD). Psychoanalyti-
cally based treatments tend not to be considered in a culture where 
organic explanations predominate. Justification for this is hard to 
find as there is meagre understanding of why this explosion is tak-
ing place. Explanations in the aetiology and inter- and intra-psychic 
dynamics of these conditions perhaps can best be demonstrated by 
detailed reports of cases that do or do not respond to treatments, and 
accounts of psychoanalytic treatment seems to be best placed to pro-
vide this. One might assume that those that respond well, includ-
ing development of function and recovery, indicate that the organic 
explanation (genetic, inherent brain structure, bio-chemistry, and 
so on) is not sufficient. It requires a wider and deeper elaboration 
including an understanding of complex psychic functioning in the 
developmental environment.

176  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
The authors are interested in teasing out both at a conceptual and 
technical level, psychoanalytic understanding of the treatment of 
one kind of ASD, that of psychogenic autism, the case that forms 
the heart of this paper. My discussion will be clinically focused, and 
I will then turn to the psychoanalytic conceptual and technical mat-
ters that are raised by the clinical material.
The clinical case
We are told that the nearly four-year-old Sophia is regarded by her 
family as a rather sweet natured dummy, whose mother herself had 
an IQ of 70 when she was a child, perhaps indicative of an inher-
itable organic cause for her daughter’s condition. However the 
grandmother brings Sophia for treatment to a psychoanalyst sug-
gesting a question in her mind as to the origin of these features of 
the females in the succeeding generations. Could the ‘dummy’ be 
caused by factors other than inherent limitations to intelligence? 
The assessment indicates autism possibly of a psychological origin, 
which is described as ‘mimetic’. Sophia echoes the words spoken to 
her, her own language being almost non-existent and she is lacking 
in initiative. Her clichéd response, ‘I don’t know,’ to most questions 
invites us to wonder what cannot be known, indeed what may be 
forbidden from being known. We are also told that her mother did 
not talk or sing to Sophia as a baby ‘because anyhow, babies do not 
understand’. It seems that her other children, older and younger 
boys, if they had received the same treatment (we are not told), had 
not turned out the same way. This might make us wonder why? Was 
there something in having a daughter that brought out the mother’s 
‘mind-blindness’, silent and mechanical, an expression of a way of 
relating or being related to, encoded in her procedural memory of 
herself as a girl baby, now re-presented with her own daughter? Her 
low IQ as a child may well indicate her own infantile inability to 
understand what could not be understood in the relational environ-
ment. Perhaps her mother, the grandmother, recognized something 
of the past, now re-enacted by her daughter with her granddaughter, 
and sought to repair it by the referral for psychoanalytic treatment. 
We are not told if there is any concurrent parent work, although one 
would expect that this would be a sine qua non  with the individual 
treatment of a young child.

FURTHER COMMENTS ON SOPHIA’S MIMETIC AUTISM   177
As the treatment gets going Sophia re-presents with her analyst 
her silent early life. Her only existence is as an echo; devoid of a 
self and the spontaneity that would indicate its existence, she func-
tions in an imitative way, mechanically repeating behaviours of 
‘care’ with the doll figures. This seems to be the limit of psychic 
representation: the play lacks imaginative elaboration and seems to 
be simply a repetition of events to which she has been subjected. 
There is no aggression. We have the sense that the analyst allows this 
to unfold, not pre-empting or forcing premature understanding.
As the analytic setting is established where the analyst is receptive 
to Sophia’s psycho-somatic states, particularly her ‘constantly seek-
ing the analyst’s eyes for approval’, Sophia can risk ‘her first fit of 
rage’ against the puppet (old man/witch) who does not look at her. 
Not seen by her ‘subjective object’ (Winnicott, 1962a: 57) Sophia’s 
archaic self is imbued with the affective sense of non-existence, just 
as her object also does not exist, which is the stuff of the autistic 
mimetic bubble that she inhabits. This play suggests that Sophia is 
already beginning to move from the imitative form, indicative of 
Ogden’s (1992: 30) ‘autistic contiguous position’, where sensory-
based experience not yet psychically represented predominates, 
towards a space where the transitional object as a primitive symbol 
is ‘both a memorial to the lost unity with the object and an attempt 
to re-instate it in effigia ’ (Wright, 1991: 104).
This play gives material for re-construction in our formulation: 
the almost closed eyes of the puppet suggest a ‘witch mother’ whose 
non-availability ruptured Sophia’s ‘going on being’ (Winnicott, 1956: 
303) prematurely, with her resulting mind-less-ness. The powerful 
affect suggests that Sophia suffered a profound de-cathexis from 
her primary object, now represented in the displacement of play. 
The analytic space provides her with an experience of congruency 
where her analyst is attentive and adapts to her unique presenta-
tion, not disrupting the establishment of her being in this context. 
Sophia’s rage, held by the analyst’s mind-full presence, promotes 
ego integration rather than fragmentation: she does not ‘crumble 
down’.
The session in the fifth month condenses the predicament of 
the child with her analyst. The mimicry of posture concretely 
expresses the false self that Sophia has defensively constructed to 
deal with the falling forever/annihilation feelings that have been 

178  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
intimated previously. But how is she to relinquish this false self 
if the consequences are so horrific? No wonder the analyst in her 
counter-transference felt that she held Sophia’s very existence in her 
gaze! Intuitively, however, the analyst senses that Sophia is ready 
for something more; she is not ‘mind-blind’ but is confident that her 
young patient is beginning to understand. Her judicious interpreta-
tion of Sophia’s fear of thinking is predicated upon this recognition. 
Its effects reflect Sophia’s sense that the analyst recognizes that she, 
Sophia, has a mind now that can work, already different within this 
new analytic relationship. Sophia goes to the puppet (the locus of 
the earlier transformative enactment) and for the first time she could 
personalize it, giving it a name; not her own but that of ‘Lola’ with 
whom she is identified. Sophia, seemingly working out of her sense 
of self, speaks for herself, separating out from the imitated object 
‘Lola’ whom she then ‘objectifies’ by drawing. The figure is trans-
formed into ‘Mum’ and then ‘Iago’ (the name she gives Santiago, her 
younger brother) and subjected to a violent attack. Sophia’s immense 
jealousy is thus enacted in the play and articulated by her analyst as 
anger and her wish to be her mother’s little baby (implicitly in the 
place of Iago). We might hypothesize that this is the re-presentation 
of the compounding trauma in Sophia’s young life: her mother’s 
pregnancy and the arrival of her younger brother. The analytic work 
allows this, taking place at the level of the body and enacted in play. 
Increasingly we can see its elaboration in psychical representation. 
The analyst’s de-adaptation or ‘disillusion’ (Winnicott, 1963: 87) is 
contingent with Sophia’s growing ability to find her own agency; 
Sophia is now on the road to relinquishing her false self and finding 
her own psychical elaboration of experience, her representational 
world, with the help of her analyst.
Throughout the clinical presentation the gradual emergence of 
Sophia’s aggression reflects her growing vitality, and her propensity 
to collapse recedes as her ego coheres and integrates. She plays in 
a significantly different way than before, engaging her analyst as 
an other who can be relied upon to be interested; the play becomes 
more complex involving both the expression of her regression to 
dependence in the play of the baby in the belly which can be risked 
now (Winnicott, 1954), and progressively in her reading and writ-
ing her name on the blackboard. However this is all understood, 
this clinical account gives a convincing description of the successful 

FURTHER COMMENTS ON SOPHIA’S MIMETIC AUTISM   179
psychoanalytic treatment of a child that is rarely available currently 
outside the consulting rooms of private practitioners.
Conceptual discussion
The central conceptual question raised by the authors is an aetio-
logical one concerning the nature of early mental life and the impact 
of its psychopathology on on-going development. This necessarily 
includes a question about the early relational environment, the 
essential context of earliest development. Despite there having been 
a long history within psychoanalytic developmental theory of a split 
between those that proposed a primary unity of infant and mother 
and those that took an albeit primitive separateness as present from 
the beginning of life, and the compounding differences accorded the 
relational environment, there seems a greater contemporary con-
sensus on these matters. Partly as a result of shifts within psychoa-
nalysis (certainly Bion [1962] but also Bowlby 1940 and Winnicott 
1945) and the influence of findings from developmental psychol-
ogy (Stern, 1985; Trevarthan, 1979) which prompted such analytic 
thinkers as Margaret Mahler and Frances Tustin to alter their own 
theorizing (Tustin, 1991), the multi-layered complexity of the inter-
psychic and intra-psychic contributions to development and its dis-
turbance seems more appreciated today. However this raises the 
question about how these different conceptual frameworks relate to 
each other. Sometimes it can seem that different words are being 
used for essentially the same concept, so that, for instance, Bion’s 
‘container-contained’ theory (Bion 1962) and Winnicott’s (1960: 44) 
theory of ‘holding’ are often used interchangeably. However they 
are predicated upon quite different theories about early mental life 
and the primary link between infant and mother in just the realm 
that the Ahumadas are writing: is there a primary separateness or 
not at the beginning of life?
In my reading of this clinical case I have used a primarily 
Winnicottian frame which espouses a subtle view of early mental 
life where merger and separateness are paradoxically both present. 
In the state of what he calls ‘the illusion of omnipotence’ (Winnicott, 
1945: 154) the mother’s almost complete adaptation to the baby’s 
needs at the beginning means that ‘omnipotence is nearly a fact of 
experience’ (Winnicott, 1951: 238). Thus the baby starts off with the 

180  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
sense that all that happens comes from the command of his own 
need: the mother’s existence is recognized in this way but only as 
congruent with the baby’s need. The sense of mother, a ‘subjective 
object’ (Winnicott, 1962a: 57), resides in the infant’s experience of 
the emotion felt ‘within the subject–object compound’, where ‘relat-
ing really means “being in a given emotional state”’ with the object 
(Scarfone, 2005: 40). This is prior to true separateness and with it 
the availability of the defences of projection and introjection, as in 
Bion’s explanation (1962). This central paradox where the alive and 
present mother is ‘created out of need’ and only later ‘found’ to have 
a separate existence, is held over time by her holding adaptation and 
graduated failure to adapt such that the baby gradually comes to 
experience ‘me’ as different from ‘not me’ and to benefit from, ‘use’ 
what the m/other provides (Winnicott, 1968: 101).
In Winnicott’s account if the mother is unable to sustain the baby’s 
experience of illusion initially before facilitating the necessary ‘dis-
illusion’ the resulting impingements expose the baby to extreme 
anxiety, described as ‘falling forever’ and ‘annihilation’. The baby 
is forced into premature states of awareness that can lead to the 
development of a false self or a schizoid retreat. In ‘Providing for the 
Child in Health and in Illness’ (1962b: 66) Winnicott describes how 
‘environmental failure’ at the stage of extreme dependence (that is, 
in the first months of life) leads to ‘mental defect, non organic [and] 
childhood schizophrenia’.
We see that in the case of Sophia these concepts can contribute 
greatly to understanding both her condition and also the psychoana-
lytic process described. In the context of an intergenerational dynamic 
this girl’s early experience of her primary ‘subjective object’ was one 
where the predominant feeling was of mutual mind-less-ness: they 
could be said to be both ‘dummies’. The mother’s lack of imaginative 
elaboration of her baby’s primitive somatic being rendered Sophia 
devoid of the opportunity for the integration of her psycho-somatic 
integrity and establishment of her self, ‘unit status’. It seems that her 
elder brother afforded a relationship where a false self, a caretaker 
self, based on imitation, could be established (Winnicott, 1960). All 
this seems to have been compounded by Sophia relinquishing her 
primary aggression that alternatively could have been harnessed in 
the service of the integration of her ego and the ‘destruction of the 
object’ in omnipotent fantasy, allowing her to find this object then 

FURTHER COMMENTS ON SOPHIA’S MIMETIC AUTISM   181
as a separate external entity (Winnicott, 1968: 105). For this to have 
been possible Sophia needed an available maternal object who could 
‘survive’ this destruction, that is to be there to be found. But even if 
her mother had begun to see her daughter as more of a mind-full 
person as she approached toddlerhood (which is sometimes the case 
in my clinical experience of mothers who do not talk to their babies 
because they ‘do not understand’), the pregnancy and arrival of 
the younger brother as I have suggested above seems to have com-
pounded the earlier trauma and reinforced Sophia’s sense of her self 
and object world as non-existent.
In the clinical process we see the antithesis of this; Sophia has a 
‘new developmental object’ experience in her analyst that enables 
her frozen development to begin again (Winnicott, 1954: 281; Hurry, 
1998: 32–73). During the early months the analyst facilitates Sophia’s 
being to emerge, without premature interpretation, which would 
have represented further impingement. Sophia very soon demon-
strates her use of the setting as she moves to a more transitional way 
of relating, as the puppet play suggests a re-enactment of the early 
trauma. This time, however, Sophia’s affects are fully engaged, as 
her rage indicates. The analyst holds the setting, allowing Sophia 
over time to integrate these accruing experiences.
The significance of the gaze is linked to the gradual move towards 
separateness both in its somatic nature (a gaze is held across a dis-
tance between two bodies) but also in its expressive potentiality. 
Wright (1991: 107) suggests that the face and the gaze, particularly 
the recognition of facial expressions, are crucial elements in the proc-
ess of symbol formation, itself inextricably linked with the develop-
ment of separateness: ‘The expression that shines through the face 
is the prototype of emergent meaning occurring before language 
begins to draw the child into a cultural world of symbols.’ The ana-
lyst holds Sophia’s gaze, seeing in it meaning about Sophia’s need 
of her; her approval is sought indicating that she matters to Sophia. 
Indeed we see just how sensitive and receptive the analyst is to 
Sophia’s states, and particularly to Sophia’s use of play as the arena 
for the emergence of her re-presented history. The difference now is 
that the object (analyst) is available to her young patient, mindfully 
elaborating meaning with her. The analyst’s timely de-adaption 
where Sophia’s imitation of her posture so eerily tests whether this 
autistic world of non-existent objects is to prevail, succeeds because 

182  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
it coincides with Sophia’s readiness to relinquish her distorted 
infantile omnipotence and instead find both her self, and the sepa-
rateness of the other in her analyst.
Throughout, the role of aggression is central. It is indicative of 
life (or its absence) and indeed if one takes a Winnicottian view, it 
is the very stuff out of which self, otherness, and separateness is 
established. Sophia’s psychoanalytic treatment provides a setting 
in which her life-giving aggression could be harnessed and given 
meaning, thus bringing her out of the autistic bubble in which 
she was imprisoned. The clinical description ends with Sophia 
triumphantly conveying to her analyst her newly acquired sense 
of self: ‘Look where I AM’, something that had been impossible so 
very recently.
Bibliography
Bion, W.R. (1962) ‘The Psychoanalytic Study of Thinking’, International 
Journal of Psychoanalysis,  43: 306–10. (And in Bion, W. [1962]. Learning 
from Experience . New York: Basic Books.)
Bowlby, J. (1940) ‘The Influence of the Early Environment in the Devel-
opment of Neurosis and Neurotic Character’, International Journal of 
Psychoanalysis,  21: 154–78.
Bowlby, J. (1958). ‘The Nature of the Child’s tie to his Mother’. Interna-
tional Journal of Psychoanalysis , 39: 350–73.
Hurry, A. (1998). ‘Psychoanalysis and Developmental Therapy’. In: 
Hurry, A. (ed.) Psychoanalysis and Developmental Therapy . London: 
Karnac.
Ogden, T.H. (1992). The Primitive Edge of Experience . London: Karnac.
Scarfone, D. (2005). ‘Laplanche and Winnicott meet … and Survive’. In: 
Caldwell, L. (ed.) Sex and Sexuality: Winnicottian Perspectives . London: 
Karnac.
Stern, D. (1985). The Interpersonal World of the Infant . New York: Basic 
Books.
Trevarthan, C. (1979). ‘Communication and cooperation in early infancy: 
a description of primary intersubjectivity’. In: Bullowa, M.M. (ed.) 
Before Speech: The Beginning of Interpersonal Communication.  New York: 
Cambridge University Press.
Tustin, F. (1991). ‘Revised Understandings of Psychogenic Autism’. 
International Journal of. Psycho-Analysis , 72: 585–91.

FURTHER COMMENTS ON SOPHIA’S MIMETIC AUTISM   183
Winnicott, D.W. (1982[1945]). ‘Primitive Emotional Development’. In: 
Collected Papers: Through Paediatrics to Psychoanalysis.  London: The 
Hogarth Press. pp. 145–56.
Winnicott, D.W. (1982[1951]). ‘Transitional Objects and Transitional 
Phenomena’. In Collected Papers: Through Paediatrics to Psychoanalysis . 
London: The Hogarth Press. pp. 229–42.
Winnicott, D.W. (1982[1954]). ‘Metapsychological and Clinical aspects 
of Regression within the Psychoanalytic Set-up’. In: Collected Papers: 
Through Paediatrics to Psychoanalysis.  London: The Hogarth Press. 
pp. 278–96. 1982.
Winnicott, D.W. (1982[1956]). ‘Primary Maternal Pre-Occupation’. In: 
Collected Papers: Through Paediatrics to Psychoanalysis.  London: The 
Hogarth Press. pp. 300–15.
Winnicott, D.W. (1972[1962a]). ‘Ego integration in child development’. 
In: The Maturational Processes and the Facilitating Environment . London: 
Hogarth Press. pp. 56–63.
Winnicott, D.W. (1972[1962b]). ‘Providing for the child in health and in 
illness’. In: The Maturational Processes and the Facilitating Environment . 
London: Hogarth Press. pp. 64–72.
Winnicott, D.W. (1972[1963]). ‘From Dependence towards Independence 
in the Development of the Individual’. In: The Maturational Processes 
and the Facilitating Environment . London: Hogarth Press. pp. 83–92. 
London: Hogarth Press.
Winnicott, D.W. (1972[1965]). ‘Ego Distortion in Terms of True and False 
Self’. In: The Maturational Processes and the Facilitating Environment . 
London: Hogarth Press. pp. 140–152.
Winnicott, D.W. (1974[1968]). ‘The Use of an Object and Relating 
Through Identifications’. In: Playing and Reality.  London: Pengiun 
Books. pp. 101–11.
Wright, K. (1991). Vision and Separation . London: Free Association 
Books.



185CHAPTER SIX
Early affect regulations and its 
disturbances: Approaching ADHD 
in a psychoanalysis with a child 
and an adult
Marianne Leuzinger-Bohleber
1 Approaching affect regulation and its disorders through 
psychoanalysis in times of theoretical pluralism
For all of the theoretical and conceptual differences, most 
psychoanalytic authors agree that disturbances in early affect regu-
lation are one of the main factors in the genesis of ADHD and other 
developmental pathologies. In times of theoretical pluralism in psy-
choanalysis, however, there are differences in the approaches used 
to explain the source and effects of an early disturbance in affect 
regulation. This rich diversity in contemporary psychoanalytic 
theory allows us, on the one hand, as if looking through a kalei-
doscope, to perceive ever new information patterns in the com-
plex clinical material and make use of them for the joint process of 
acquiring knowledge with our patients, as I would like to illustrate 
with examples from two cases. On the other hand, epistemologi-
cally and methodologically, as Charles Hanly will elaborate for us 
in his paper, the pluralism in psychoanalysis today puts us before 
demanding problems which, however, I cannot discuss in this con-
text (cf. Leuzinger-Bohleber and Bürgin, 2003; Leuzinger-Bohleber, in 
press). To stay with the metaphor: the view through the kaleidoscope 

186  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
may very well give us access to the abundance and multiplicity of 
clinical observation, but, as Hanly explains, this does not relieve us 
of the need to recognize irreconcilable contradictions in the theoreti-
cal explanations of clinical phenomena and make them the subject 
of an intrapsychoanalytic, interdisciplinary, dialogue devoted to 
research and unification of the psychoanalytic base knowledge. In 
this process, as I see it, a form of psychoanalytic conceptual research 
has a central role to play, which stays close to the clinical research in 
psychoanalysis while taking the results of empirical and interdisci-
plinary research into account in its critical reflections on psychoana-
lytic concepts. Therefore, in my paper I’d like to try to make use of 
the view through the plural kaleidoscope to search for common fea-
tures as well as contradictions in explaining the genesis of ADHD, 
and—together with clinical observations—integrate them into a cur-
rent understanding of this syndrome.
Ego-psychology authors  emphasize that the primary object in a 
characteristic ‘ADHD family’ has hardly made it possible for the 
child to develop enough good, stable ego functions. The child is exis-
tentially dependent upon receiving reliable and continuous support 
from the primary objects to regulate its behaviour, which is to say, its 
physiological, sensory, motoric, and affective processes. If the par-
ents are not able to provide the child with this kind of support, it will 
hardly be able to develop adequate primary regulation of its drive 
impulses and affects: hyperactivity may be one of the consequences! 
Moreover, drive impulses that have not been sufficiently integrated 
psychically will flood the ego, especially in situations favouring 
this, and thus will inhibit or impede altogether the development of 
secondary-process symbolic thinking—in other words, the ability to 
focus attention on a particular situation, to verbalize affects, needs, 
and fantasies, as well as the ability to concentrate.
Be that as it may, according to Spezzano (1993), it was above all 
William R.D. Fairbairn who, in the 1940s, initiated the explicit discus-
sion of affect regulation. He can be regarded as the pioneer of psycho-
analytic object relations theory . He became known above all for noting 
that the libido is not primarily pleasure-seeking but object-seeking. 
Affects offer the means of distinguishing between ‘good’ and ‘bad’ 
objects and/or experiences and the related ego states, which is of great 
significance for the psyche because the unbearable negative internal-
ized objects, parts of the ego, and relational experiences are repressed 

EARLY AFFECT REGULATIONS AND ITS DISTURBANCES   187
into the unconscious. This is why authors close to psychoanalytic object 
relations theory  focus on internalizations of important relationships in 
earliest childhood when they are looking for plausible explanations 
for the emergence of ADHD symptoms. They regard internaliza-
tion processes as central to the formation of psychic structures, but 
also of drive needs and personality traits. More recent—clinical and 
empirical—studies have shown that it is important to distinguish 
between two states of affect in infants: states with relatively low 
affect activation and states with strong, intensive affect, so-called 
‘peak affects’ (cf. Kernberg, 2001; Laplanche, 1996). In the first, ‘mild’ 
affective state, ‘normal’ internalizations of our experiences can take 
place through contact with other persons, which lead to the devel-
opment of normal ego functions. The experiences are tied to pleas-
ant body feelings that are adequate to reality, which—as discussed 
by Leuzinger-Bohleber and Pfeifer (2002)—leave an impression on 
the child’s ‘embodied’ memory as sensomotoric-affective coordina-
tions. In later situations with analogous information that we take 
up over the various sensory channels (auditive, visual, haptic, and 
so forth), these sensomotoric-affective coordinations help us to pro-
duce ‘memory’. In other words, based on earlier experiences as ori-
entation in reality, we can develop expectations in terms of what we 
consider ‘normal’ behaviour on the part of our interaction partners 
and ‘adequately’ interpret them. In the course of development they 
are connected to images and language. This differs from the expe-
rience with so-called ‘peak affects’, that is, intensive positive and 
negative affects that exceed the infant’s ability to process stimuli. 
Such extreme affective states, of joy, euphoria, happiness of being 
together with another person, or of anxiety, fright, rage, or pain, give 
rise to psychically problematic, but extremely viable, ‘embodied’’ 
memories: images of idealized relationships that are oriented to the 
happy moments of the child on the breast and leave their impression 
on the psyche as wishes for fusion with the love object, of union, and 
absolute devotion. The extremely negative affects—analogously—
produce extreme self-images of a hating being that is at the mercy 
of intensive aggressions, helplessly exposed to attacks from the 
outside. The more intensive the frustrations and the experiences of 
pain—in traumatic experiences, for example—the more intensive 
will be the aggressive impulses that have been triggered by them, 
which the child’s ego cannot psychically bear or attribute to its own 

188  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
self: this is why it projects these aggressive impulses immediately 
onto others and consequently feels threatened and persecuted from 
the outside as well. As a result, a memory of relational experiences 
that were negative and dangerous—for the self and the object—
become engrained as ‘psychic truths’. Consequently, at times when 
peak affect is discharged, or in traumatic situations, there is a psychic 
tendency to categorize events and experiences as absolutely good or 
absolutely bad: relationships are split up into an idealized part and 
a persecuting part.
Under normal, non-traumatic, or as Winnicott calls them, ‘good 
enough’ conditions, an increasing tolerance develops vis-à-vis such 
extreme situations, so that the archaic-primitive experience, split-
ting between ‘good’ and ‘bad’, can finally be psychically integrated 
(cf. Melanie Klein’s distinction between the ‘paranoid-schizoid posi-
tion’ and the ‘depressive position’). Psychoanalytic object relations 
theory has emphasized that the external object has to help—through 
empathy with the helpless infant’s condition—to enable the peak 
affects to be relieved repeatedly, ‘reliably’ and predictably. There-
fore, it conveys a primal trust in a good object. In parallel to this, 
the ‘emerging self’ feels itself psychically capable of making its own 
contribution towards helping to rid itself of extreme frustrations, 
of anger and hate. Therefore, it defines itself as a fundamentally 
active, potent self that is not just passively at the mercy of another. 
In the process, the self can—in the terminology of psychoanalytic 
self-psychology—eventually do without archaic primitive defence 
mechanisms, such as the fantasy of the grandiose self or the omnipo-
tent parental imago, and develop a supportive, secure, and coherent 
core sense of self (cf. Parens, 2010, among others).
In recent years, it has been above all the empirical findings of affect 
and infant research  that have roused the interest of psychoanalysts 
in affect regulation. Numerous studies have shown that the most 
important reinforcement system in early childhood is the affectivity 
of the social partner (Krause, 1998, 2005). This is true not only in the 
first months of life but later as well, when the child as a one-year 
old, for example, with the increasing mobility and related cogni-
tive, speech, and emotional changes, has to depend more on a social, 
security-providing assurance of its ‘home base’ by its primary refer-
ence person. A number of impressive studies have been forthcoming 
on so-called ‘Social Referencing’. The most well-known experiment 

EARLY AFFECT REGULATIONS AND ITS DISTURBANCES   189
is probably a modification of the crawling over a ‘visual cliff’, which 
was originally used to test the child’s perception and age-adequate 
anxiety reactions. New analyses of the video tapes have now shown 
that crawling children seek eye contact with their mothers as soon 
as they perceive a (presumed) danger. It provides impressive evi-
dence that it is not the purely cognitive or verbal feedbacks that 
alleviate the children’s fear: it is above all the resonating, emotional 
reaction of the reference person that can give the child a feeling of 
security. This example also shows us the relevance of empathic guid-
ance in the early stages of development for the formation of emo-
tional, cognitive, and social skills. If the capacities for ‘attunement’, 
containing, and holding, as well as (later) for social referencing are 
lacking, the child will not be able to identify with these capacities 
through identification with the ‘good enough’ object and succes-
sively develop its own inner impulse and affect regulation.
Daniel Stern (1985), to name just one example, impressively 
showed in microanalyses of video-recorded interactions how infants 
react to their depressive mothers. He distinguished various types of 
such reactions. Infants of one type seem to try, with all they’ve got, 
to bring their ‘dead mother’ back to life: an observable hyperactive 
behaviour is the result. Moreover, these babies do not seem to have 
enough internal and external space for them to experience their own 
impulses and feelings as indicators of an ‘emerging self’. They are 
too little able to have the recurring experience of a ‘self-effect’, ‘self-
coherence’, and ‘self-affectivity’, which gives them the basic feeling 
of having their own self-history, a feeling which, as we know in the 
meantime, is one of the prerequisites for the development of a stable 
core feeling of self. This may be one of the reasons why the develop-
ment of a ‘false self’ is often observed in ADHD children in psycho-
analytic psychotherapy.
Important contributions to affect regulation have also been forth-
coming in empirical attachment research (cf. Döll-Hentkscher, 2008, 
among others). In this tradition, Peter Fonagy, György Gergely, Elliot 
L. Jurist, and Mary Target (2002/2004) recently presented an original 
understanding of affect regulation, which I’d like to mention only 
briefly here, since Peter Fonagy and Mary Target have elaborated on 
their concepts in their own papers in this volume. They take up many 
of the above-mentioned psychoanalytic explanatory models, but 
formulate the claim to explain the development of affect regulation 

190  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
and its disturbances, as well as the closely related development of 
mentalization capacity, on the causal basis of a social biofeedback 
model for the first time. ‘Coordinated interactions with the mother’ 
(Jaffe, Beebe, Feldstein, Crown, and Jasnow, 2001; Stern, 1985) often 
go hand in hand with affect mirroring, which is to say that the mother 
represents to the child, through her facial and vocal expression, the 
feelings that she thinks it is having, in order to calm and alleviate the 
baby’s emotions. In our opinion, affect mirroring supports the capac-
ity for affect regulation by giving the child an opportunity to build 
up secondary representations of its constitutional states of affect. 
The internalized image of the reference person who reflects what 
is going on inside the infant becomes the organizer of the child’s 
emotional experience. So, the self is not merely accessible to environ-
mental influence, but is to some extent constituted by its interactions 
with the social environment’ (Fonagy et al., 2002/2004: 15). Conse-
quently, for these authors the concept of ‘affect regulation’ plays a 
central role in the constitution of self-development and the develop-
ment of mentalization capacity.
For the developmental disorders that are the focus here, such as 
ADHD, it is especially relevant that problematic early relationships, 
maltreatment, or other traumatizations hamper the development of 
mentalization and reflection, for, as Fonagy and Target have pointed 
out, mentalization and secure attachment are primarily the results 
of good containment experience, in the sense of early affect regula-
tion as just described, in early socialization. Insecure attachment can 
be understood as the child’s identification with the mother’s defen-
sive behaviour. These mothers are, for example, not able to mirror 
the child’s negative affects and stress, because they themselves feel 
threatened by them. When such negative affects are perceived, they 
probably revive memories of their own unbearable experiences, 
which then have to be warded off. Consequently, these children can 
only maintain the closeness to their mother if they sacrifice their 
ability to reflect at the same time. In the case of so-called ‘entangled 
mothers’, on the other hand, negative affects in the child are mir-
rored in an exaggerated way or are confused with their own experi-
ences, which then seems strange or alarming to the child. In both 
forms of insecure attachment, the children will internalize the refer-
ence person’s attitude. The lack of synchronicity between the child’s 
own state of affect and that of its mother then becomes the content 
of the child’s experience of self.

EARLY AFFECT REGULATIONS AND ITS DISTURBANCES   191
Early severe traumatizations have an even more dramatic effect 
on the development or, as the case may be, lack of development, 
in mentalization capacity. In a recent paper, Fonagy (2007) reports 
on severely traumatized children and adolescents whom he inter-
viewed and/or treated in therapy in prison. One of the main con-
tributing factors behind their acts of violence was that they had 
developed little if any capacity for mentalization, and consequently 
were not able, for example, to put themselves in their victims’ place, 
mentally. He speaks of ‘violent attachment’ and/or of attachment 
trauma. These adolescents could be most aptly described with the 
diagnosis of ‘borderline disorder’.
Although many of the ADHD children in the Frankfurt Prevention 
Study (FP) and the therapeutic efficacy study currently underway 
have also experienced early traumatizations (and exhibit insecure 
attachment types), most of them could not be characterized as bor-
derline children. The following two case examples are intended to 
show that they often suffer from serious disorders in affect and drive 
regulation nonetheless, albeit in a different way.
At this point I would like to raise the question of whether the 
subgroup of ADHD children, to which the following two patients 
belong, involves a specific deviant of the early affect mirroring that is 
related to the depressive illness of the primary object, which proved 
to be a traumatogenic factor for their children. Depressive mothers, 
as Daniel Stern’s studies also show, will mirror above all the nega-
tive peak affects of their babies in a specific ‘ incongruently, categori-
cally distorted ’ (Fonagy et al., 2004: 201, italics, M.L-B) way, and will 
therefore hardly be able to help their babies develop adequate affect 
regulation in this regard.
Therefore, from a psychoanalytic point of view, and as one will 
see from the case examples, it is absolutely necessary to uncover the 
idiosyncratic trauma history of an ADHD child or adult together 
with the patient, in order to recognize the specific causes behind the 
affect and impulse regulation disorder (cf. Bohleber, 2007; Grubrich-
Simitis, 2007, among others). In contrast to a form of medication-
based treatment, for example, exploratory therapeutic work of this 
kind offers an opportunity to forego the unconscious roots of the fail-
ures in the inner regulation processes which may lead to the ADHD 
symptoms and instead make an active effort to tackle the weakness 
in affect and impulse regulation. In the transference to the analyst, 
the ‘embodied memories’ of the traumatogenic object relations and 

192  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
related fantasies become recognizable, as well as the yearning for 
alternative experiences that are used in effective treatments in the 
sense of the above-mentioned internalization processes, for the 
development of stable affect regulation.
2 Psychoanalytic treatment as an opportunity to understand 
the specific causes behind the disorders in affect and drive 
regulation, and treat them with lasting effect in the therapeutic 
relationship: Two cases
Because I can only present fragments of clinical material in this 
framework, I am drawing on two treatment cases that I have pub-
lished in greater length elsewhere (Leuzinger-Bohleber, 1984, 2000).
2.1 Early disturbance in affect regulation—one of the main 
determining factors in AD/HS. Insights from the analysis 
with a child based on a catamnestic follow-up 31 years after 
the termination of treatment
Nora was referred to me as a ten-year old for psychological evalua-
tion, because her parents, both Ethnology Professors, felt they had 
‘come to the end of their rope’ with her. They had already tried a 
number of different therapies and advancement programmes with 
Nora: all of them without success. Now Nora was to be put in a 
special education programme for children with low IQs because 
of her chronic failure in school. Nora suffered from an extremely 
short attention span, low concentration, adipositas, serious sleep 
disturbances, skin rashes, an almost complete social withdrawal, 
and forms of self-destructive behaviour (occasionally she cut herself 
with a knife), as well as sudden aggressive outbursts towards her 
younger brother.
In the Kramer Intelligence Test Nora had an IQ of 132. The pro-
jective tests revealed her absolutely rich, albeit very threatening, 
inner fantasy world. The Göttinger Form Reproduction Test that 
was in widespread application at the time revealed signs of an MCD 
(Minimal Cerebral Dysfunction).
In the four-year child psychoanalysis (three sessions per week), 
we pieced together the following picture of Nora’s trauma history 
like a puzzle:

EARLY AFFECT REGULATIONS AND ITS DISTURBANCES   193
Two days after Nora’s birth with many complications, her 
mother’s father died, a serious loss for Nora’s mother. She suf-
fered from severe bouts of depression for months and took anti-
depressants. When Nora was six months of age, she fell out 
of her father’s arm through the open second-storey window. 
‘Maybe that’s the reason for her MCD,’ her father said during 
the evaluation, full of guilt feelings. Nora was laid up in hospi-
tal for several weeks and developed severe sleeping and eating 
problems. When she was one and a half years of age, her brother 
was born: she reacted with massive jealousy and frequent obsti-
nate ‘temper tantrums’. When she was three years old, her 
parents took on a research project in Africa. Her parents both 
described the next three years as ‘the family’s happiest’. Her 
mother in particular enjoyed her interesting career activity and 
having her children taken care of by warm-hearted ‘surrogate 
mothers in a loving village community’. In order to give Nora 
a good education, the family moved back to Germany when 
it was time to enrol her in school. Nora’s mother commented, 
‘That’s when the problems started. Nora had been driven out of 
her children’s paradise—she hated the German school, German 
children, and became the chronic rebel …’ Nora finally became 
depressive, pseudoasthenic, and psychosomatically ill. Nor did 
moving to a place near her paternal grandparents in a rural area 
of Switzerland have much influence on Nora’s dire mental and 
psychosocial condition.
Fortunately, Nora allowed me to open a window to the state of her 
psyche. She had a gift for drawing and conveyed her frightening 
unconscious fantasies to me in them, the burden of guilt about her 
mother’s depression as well as her deep-seated feelings of insuffi-
ciency, that she had not been able as a ‘sunshine baby’ and toddler 
to lift her mother’s mood—through her (hyperactive) behaviour. 
She was also unconsciously convinced that she wanted to kill her 
brother out of unbearable feelings of jealousy, and that her father’s 
serious physical ailment when she was four was her fault. We even-
tually understood her psychosomatic symptoms as well as her short 
attention span and the related pseudo mental subnormality as prod-
ucts of her tendencies to punish herself due to archaic feelings of 
guilt, fantasies of revenge, and a deep-seated hatred for her primary 

194  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
objects. In the analytic work it became clear that Nora had developed 
little if any fundamental, supporting feeling of self or enough good 
regulation mechanisms in dealing with her affects and drive wishes. 
When her problem with aggression came to the fore in the transfer-
ence, Nora did not speak a word with me in the sessions for three 
months. I ultimately felt desperate, helpless, and powerless and 
was often convinced that Nora would break off the treatment. Over 
and over and over again, I tried to verbalize the desperation that 
I perceived in Nora and link it to possible fantasies and anxieties—
but without being able to have my impressions actually confirmed 
by a verbal reaction from Nora. I had to rely on my associations 
to the drawings for this, for example. We finally achieved a break-
through in one session when Nora completely painted over garish 
luminous colours in neo-colour chalk with black and then timidly 
attempted to scratch coloured figures from out of the black. ‘You 
know, this picture seems to me like our work in all of those sessions 
that have been so difficult for us the last few weeks. A despairing 
blackness is spreading out between us and covering up everything 
that is alive and colourful. You have literally lost your tongue here—
maybe because unconsciously you want to let us know that this 
blackness, this heaviness, in your soul also comes from a time when 
you couldn’t talk yet and your mother was in a “black, depressive” 
mood, which you felt but didn’t understand. It’s entirely possible 
that your body and your soul remember it without you noticing it, 
and are now trying to make themselves understood in your silence. 
You are probably yearning for us here to succeed in scratching up 
something colourful again, something unbearable, that is under-
neath all that black … and rediscover the life inside you …’ Nora 
began weeping profusely … the dam seemed to have broken. In the 
following sessions we were able to talk about how much she still felt 
responsible for her mother's depressions and attributed them to her 
own murderous impulses.
For Nora, it seemed decisive that I (as a ‘good object’), but also the 
analytic treatment, had survived her desperate, aggressive silence as 
well as her fantasized destructive attacks.
I will never forget how changed Nora was when she came to 
the first session after the summer break following the months just 
described: beaming, self-confident—bubbling over with vitality and 
a love of life. She told me that she had had her first menstruation 

EARLY AFFECT REGULATIONS AND ITS DISTURBANCES   195
during the break and was able for the first time to open her mouth at 
the dentist ’s so that he could treat her aching tooth.
In the months to come, her performance at school improved tre-
mendously. She was able to concentrate better and was able to sit still 
in her seat and follow what was being taught in class. We understood 
how much psychic energy she had had to keep investing in dealing 
with her depressive moods and fantasies up to then. ‘My heart was 
usually never in school anyway …’, was her comment once. It was 
clear that she was now verbalizing her fantasies in a form of ‘black 
humour’ and had become very sharp-witted, getting lots of laughs 
out of her pubescent classmates when, for example, the class had 
arguments with their teachers. This was one of the reasons why she 
was now able to overcome the social isolation, and find a place for 
herself in the class and a few good friends. Three years later, she 
expressed the wish to terminate her psychoanalytic treatment.
Last year, 31 years after completing the treatment, Nora wrote 
me an e-mail (she had found out my address by chance). In a long 
phone conversation she told me that she had found her way, profes-
sionally and personally. She could not remember any of the details 
of the therapy, just how important it had been for her in order ‘to 
leave the darkness of my childhood behind …’. She mentioned that 
she had taken care of her father until he died and was able to talk 
with him about a lot of things in her childhood again—her mother's 
depressions, the accident during the first year of her life, the tem-
per tantrums after her brother was born, her desperate reaction 
after returning to Europe, her poor performance at school, and her 
numerous fruitless attempts at therapy.
It seems interesting to me for our subject here to note that Nora 
told me that although she still had to deal with depressive moods, 
especially if she was disappointed in love relationships, she had 
overcome her severe problems with concentration and attention 
span: her work had taken on compensatory functions for her—also 
in times of depressive moods.
In my full-length case report (Leuzinger, 1984), I had limited 
myself primarily to the description of the analytic process, with a 
focus on the work that was done on the unconscious conflict and fan-
tasy world in the transference. It was not until the subject of ADHD 
became an issue in recent years that I began wondering whether the 
mentioned phase of the extreme negative transference, for example, 

196  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
which—as I perceived it—had proved to be a breakthrough for Nora ’s 
process of change—could also be understood in connection with the 
problem of affect and impulse regulation. During those months, 
as mentioned, Nora brought me into the position of a depressive, 
helpless mother who is incapable of understanding the discomfort 
and desperation of her speechless little baby and leading it out of 
an unbearable inner state. In this sense—in the sense of ‘embodied 
memories’—she seemed to be repeating central experiences with her 
depressive primary object in the transference. In addition, Nora's 
extreme aggressive-destructive impulses as well as her fantasy of 
destroying her object became very real. The strong affective reac-
tion to my reconstructive interpretation was apparently a ‘turning 
point’ (and/or a ‘Now Moment’, see Daniel Stern) in the treatment. 
As I see it now, however, it is likely that the changes were not attrib-
utable to just this interpretation alone. Presumably my continuous 
efforts in the previous months to keep verbalizing these fantasies 
and impulses as well as the state of extreme desperation and loneli-
ness, contributed to a symbolization and/or mentalization capacity 
in Nora, so that the aggressive-destructive impulses, for example, 
could be understood and ultimately verbalized by her and no longer 
had to be mentally split off, acted out, or somatized in an extreme 
way, as they had been before.
In my presence, with me as an emotionally supportive and 
containing object, Nora was willing to try to face the threatening 
world of extreme (destructive) affects and impulses. In contrast to 
her depressive primary object, I was in a better position to perceive 
these affects, let myself be emotionally infected by them in the sense 
of a resonant attunement, and mirror them back to Nora in a more 
mature, more bearable form in my verbalizations. Nora was gradu-
ally able to identify with this way of dealing with affects—and/or to 
internalize my analytic, affect-regulating posture.
Just as an example of what I mean: together with her brother, she 
would take off in her father ’s Mercedes late at night and drive it 
up and down the winding curves of an Alpine road—at breakneck 
speed. This seemed to me like an enactment of her conviction that 
her primary objects don't even take note of the mortal dangers to 
which their children are exposed. At first I was horrified and panic-
stricken by what she was telling me. In terms of clinical technique, 
I didn ’t quite know how to deal with these ‘confessions’, being new 

EARLY AFFECT REGULATIONS AND ITS DISTURBANCES   197
to the profession at the time. After a supervision with Jaques Berna, 
an experienced child analyst, I finally said, ‘You must sense how 
scared I am that something bad might happen to you and your 
brother on these risky undertakings. At the same time you seem to 
be testing me to see whether I will stick to our agreement and keep 
everything you tell me to myself and not tell your parents about 
it. But if I just sit here on my hands and don't do anything about 
it, this could also be an affirmation for an unconscious truth inside 
you that we know from many other scenes here, namely, that your 
counterpart, which also means me, in other words, basically doesn't 
care whether you live or die …’ Fortunately, Nora seemed to under-
stand this interpretation. That night she ‘happened’ to let the garage 
door fall shut with such a loud sound that her parents woke up 
and saw what was going on. I found it noteworthy that her father 
didn't take it the wrong way or punish her harshly for it, but reacted 
above all with a great deal of concern, recognized and was sensitive 
to Nora's suicidal intentions, and therefore wanted to know why 
Nora was putting herself and her brother in such extreme jeopardy. 
Nora experienced his interest in her and her motives as an existen-
tial proof of his love for her. In the analysis sessions that followed, 
as I read in my notes, our work focused on regulating her extreme 
aggressive-destructive impulses towards herself and her parents. (In 
retrospect, this seems to have been an important phase in the strug-
gle for enhanced affect regulation, both in the transference relation-
ship with me and in the outside world—precisely, for example, in 
the relationship to her parents.)
I'd now like to present in brief a similar reinterpretation of 
the clinical material from the psychoanalysis of a young man 
with extreme concentration and attention problems and extreme 
hyperactivity.
The struggle for affect regulation in an adult analysis
The 28-year old Mr A, a well-built young man, who was apparently 
of Arab cultural origin, was unemployed and socially completely 
isolated when he sought therapeutic help. As he described it, being 
close to other people was a big problem for him. ‘Whenever some-
one gets close to me, at work on the occasional jobs I get, for exam-
ple, or a woman, I panic—I feel an internal compulsion to go to the 

198  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
nearest airport, book a “last-minute flight” and, if at all possible, fly 
to another continent …’ We also related these anxieties to a possible 
therapeutic relationship: ‘… There are a lot of things I can do, of 
course, to try and relieve these anxieties,’ I said, in a spontaneous 
association, ‘but I can't pick up my couch and get on the next plane 
with you …’ We were both able to smile to ourselves about this fan-
tasy which did not seem to hurt anyone ’s feelings or put a distance 
between us, an indication to me that a form of unconscious commu-
nication could develop between us.
I learned next to nothing about his life-history in the two initial 
interviews, except that Mr A was the product of an intercultural 
marriage between an Iranian refugee, an engineer, and a German 
secretary, a relationship that he described as being chronically 
unhappy. Both of them had a problem with alcohol. His father was 
now very sick with a physical ailment and still worked from time 
to time in a snack bar. His mother ran a carpet-cleaning company, 
which was at risk of folding. He had three siblings—two brothers, 
both older than him, and a younger sister. Both brothers had drug 
problems, were repeatedly involved in acts of violence, and had been 
unemployed for years. His sister was still in school and was adipose. 
He suffered from occasional ‘eating binges’ himself, he said, which 
were followed by severe stomach cramps and insomnia.
After his training as an auto mechanic, Mr A went back to get his 
A level qualification through adult education programmes, in spite 
of having big problems with attention span and concentration, and 
then finished a bachelor’s degree programme in the USA in two 
years. He returned to Germany to save his mother’s business, but 
without success. ‘I’ve been unemployed myself for over a year now 
and only earn a little money every once in awhile as a tour guide …’
As in Nora ’s case, there was a phase of strong negative trans-
ference in Mr A ’s psychoanalysis and a massive crisis in the treat-
ment, which had to be worked through and then also proved to be 
the turning point of the treatment. This is why I'm excerpting this 
sequence of the treatment here:
During the second year of the psychoanalysis, Mr A eventu-
ally stopped saying anything at all on the couch. I was less and 
less able to reach him emotionally and felt at a loss myself as 
to what to do, desperate, and very depressed. Mr A wouldn’t 

EARLY AFFECT REGULATIONS AND ITS DISTURBANCES   199
say anything for weeks. Helplessly I tried to verbalize what 
I thought I was picking up without any visible reaction from 
Mr A. I was extremely concerned, above all because Mr A often 
came to the sessions as much as half an hour late. Often I was 
afraid that something catastrophic had happened and won-
dered whether I should actively seek the patient. At the same 
time, I felt terrorized by his behaviour and sensed the analy-
sand’s destructive aggressive impulses towards me and the 
analysis. After waiting over 30 minutes for him again one time, 
I was plagued once again by fears that Mr A had killed him-
self; I was feeling helpless and powerless. Then, all of a sudden, 
my affects changed—I felt a mixture of anger, obstinacy, and 
rebellion and thought to myself: ‘Well, after all, I’m not Holy 
Mary—if he doesn’t want to, then that’s just the way it is …’ 
Obstinately, I left my practice and went to the mailbox—at this 
very moment, Mr A came around the corner … I felt caught off 
guard and started the session by saying: ‘For some reason, you 
seem to have reached a point with me where I don’t expect you 
to come to the sessions anymore and am starting to give up. 
I don’t know what you’re trying to tell us by remaining silent in 
all of those sessions and by coming too late. I think I’m picking 
up a mixture of desperation and helplessness, but also aggres-
sion and anger towards me. I’m wondering whether uncon-
sciously you feel that you have to enact that I, too, am losing 
interest in you and don’t care whether you come to the sessions 
or not—is that it?’ Mr A then broke his silence and told me that 
he had just had the association of finding his mother in bed in a 
dark room when he came home from school as a seven-year old. 
‘She wasn’t able to cook a warm meal for years—I had to do that 
myself already in second grade and take care of my siblings …’ 
‘Could it be that you are now pressing me, too, into the role of a 
depressive, helpless mother and/or are convinced that I’m not 
taking care of you anyway and don’t care whether you come to 
the session or not, since you don’t get anything nutritious to eat 
here anyway, nothing that you need to stay alive?’
Mr A then described how he had practically withdrawn altogether 
from the real world the last few weeks, had been spending all day 
at home alone, often lying in bed for hours, frequently masturbating 

200  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
compulsively or ‘feeding his face’ in order to alleviate the inner 
feelings of emptiness at least a little bit. Often he dragged himself 
to the analysis sessions with only the greatest of effort. He con-
firmed my suspicion that he was extremely suicidal and told me, for 
example, that he could hardly drive by high-rises without feeling 
an internal compulsion to go up to the highest floor of the build-
ing and jump off. His silence during the sessions was, as in Nora ’s 
case, also an enactment of an unconscious truth, that the primary 
object is incapable of putting itself in his desperate and existentially 
threatening state and getting him out of this mental horror. Being 
close to a love object evidently reactivated such an archaic yearning 
to be loved and understood that he felt completely overwhelmed 
by it and had a panicky anxiety about losing his autonomy, his self. 
But this was also connected to his conviction that being near his love 
object would cause him to lose control over his own aggressive-
destructive impulses and destroy the object, mentally or in reality, 
fantasies and impulses which, as I am about to mention, had pre-
sumably been overly stimulated by the severe emotional neglect 
from his mother, traumatic separation experiences, as well as his 
father's suicide attempt when the patient was 11 years old. This is 
why he experienced being close to a love object—in reality, but also 
in the analytic relationship with me—as life-threatening, both for 
the self and for the object.
As in the psychoanalysis with Nora, the scene just described 
opened a door to the history of Mr A ’s trauma, which gradually 
unfolded in the course of the intensive four-year psychoanalysis. 
I can only summarize it briefly here and hope that it will still become 
clear that the fear of losing control runs like a thread through his 
biography.
After his birth, his mother suffered from severe post-partum 
depression and was treated with anti-depressants for months. When 
he was two, A was separated from her for six weeks because of a stay 
in hospital. He was already a problem in kindergarten due to his 
hyperactive, unconcentrated behaviour and often got entangled in 
aggressive conflicts with other children. At age four, he was in a chil-
dren ’s home for almost half a year, because his mother was suffering 
from depressions again and felt that it was just all too much for her. 
During the whole time he was in elementary school, his mother also, 
as just mentioned, often stayed in bed for days at a time. He had to 

EARLY AFFECT REGULATIONS AND ITS DISTURBANCES   201
take care of his little sister himself. In the psychoanalysis we found 
that the intimate contact to the toddler got through to him in his great 
loneliness and therefore meant a lot to him. One time, before enter-
ing puberty, when he was age ten or so, he had an erection while the 
little girl was sitting on his lap, which alarmed him; he was presum-
ably afraid of losing control over his sexual impulses. After that, he 
refused to babysit for his sister anymore and turned his attention 
to a group of boys that played soccer together. At age 11, he found 
his father after a suicide attempt with pills and saved his life by 
mobilizing the emergency rescue unit. After this dramatic event, he 
gave up all activities in the soccer club and tried to concentrate on 
school. When the German teacher he idealized made fun of him in 
front of the whole class by reading his paper aloud with belittling 
comments, this was a further catastrophe for him: He lost interest 
in school, was often truant, and came increasingly under the influ-
ence of a group of violent, right-wing radicals. In the psychoanaly-
sis, the memory of a physical conflict with his father became a key 
scene: His father beat him up in front of his peer group in a pub. He 
remembered being afraid that he might hit back and kill his father, 
as one of his friends had done to their father: This adolescent had 
stood in front of his mother to protect her when his drunken father 
started beating up on her; he threw the father up against a radiator 
so hard that the man died of a severe head injury. After the scene in 
the pub, A ’s parents refused to let him go on living with them: He 
lived on the street for almost a year, was able to get by with petty 
crime, was involved in right-wing radical actions, took drugs, and 
was extremely suicidal. It seemed almost like a miracle to us that one 
day one of the few friends he had from grade school ran into him 
and took him home with him. They took him in there lovingly and 
he fell in love with his friend's sister. With the help of this ‘adoptive ’ 
family, he was able to extricate himself from the violent youth group 
and ultimately started the training to become an auto mechanic.
As mentioned, I’ve summarized the analytic process elsewhere 
which brought Mr A out of his complete social isolation and unem-
ployment and enabled him to have an intensive, stable love relation-
ship. His psychosomatic symptoms also steadily improved. As in the 
report on Nora’s case, I concentrated my summary of the treatment 
on the successive work on Mr A’s archaic fantasy and conflict world 
as it was manifested to me in the transference. I did not notice until 

202  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
now, in conjunction with our subject matter here, that the analytic 
process ‘could also be told’ from the focus of struggling for an 
understanding of the factors behind the lack of affect and drive con-
trol and the ‘deferred development’ of this capacity. It is only now 
that I noticed how tremendously important it had been for Mr A that 
during his third analysis-year he started reflecting on his eating hab-
its and went on a very strict diet to get it under control. He got up 
two hours early every morning and chewed on a hard, bone-dry 
bread roll for a whole hour as called for by the diet. In fact he visibly 
lost weight and systematically restructured his eating habits with 
the help of a dietician. He tried to do much the same thing in the 
sexual domain by finally giving up his excessive masturbation and 
compulsive visits to prostitutes (both, incidentally, had often created 
problems for him in his job). Instead he sought regular sexual grati-
fication with his girlfriend. Finally, he devoted himself to a martial 
arts sport, which we understood as an attempt to deal constructively 
with his aggressive-destructive impulses. It was impressive for me 
to see that—in parallel with these efforts to gain control—he was 
able to overcome his extreme work and concentration disorder as 
well as his symptom of constantly having to walk back and forth in 
his work-room and/or alleviate his enormous inner tension by dis-
appearing into the lavatory so often in order to masturbate. He had 
already lost two jobs because of it. Now he was able to experience 
the structure in a large-surface office as helpful and achieved stable 
good performance results in his job because of it, which ultimately 
led to a permanent position.
As in the psychoanalysis with Nora, it now seems to me that in the 
analytic process it was not only a matter of a containing and hold-
ing function, as I had described it in my report at the time, but also 
of a process of searching for the reasons behind the critical weak-
ness with regard to affect and impulse regulation in the patient’s 
life-history. Moreover, I was something like a well-meaning, affec-
tively involved, and ‘mirroring’ companion in his diverse attempts 
to get a hold on his body and, in this fundamental sense, become the 
‘boss in his own house’ again. It also seems to me that my role was 
also one of an affectively resonating guide, a ‘good’ and ‘indestruct-
ible’ object that could understand and verbalize panic, desperation, 
anger, and hatred—presumably experiences that he had only had in 
an inadequate way with his two depressive primary objects—which, 

EARLY AFFECT REGULATIONS AND ITS DISTURBANCES   203
in addition to the separation traumatizations mentioned, was most 
likely one of the main reasons for his weakness with regard to affect 
and impulse control.
Summary
The two cases have been presented as examples in the sense of a 
re-interpretation of the analytic process that had taken place to call 
our attention to the manifestation, understanding, and acquisition 
of sustainable affect and impulse control. In my view, psychoanaly-
sis offers a unique instrument of knowledge with which to probe the 
idiosyncratic, complex set of factors involved in a concentration and 
hyperactivity disorder, and thus to provide the basis for overcom-
ing these symptoms by getting a new hold on the body through a 
‘deferred’ process of developing the control over one’s own impulses 
and affects. The opportunity to make use of a therapeutic relation-
ship for such processes of change and insight seems to be spoilt by a 
medication-based treatment.
At the same time, I hope that the two case descriptions also 
showed that there is more involved in the psychopathology of the 
focus group of ADHD children than that of the severely traumatized 
borderline cases described by Peter Fonagy. One of the main differ-
ences, it seems to me, is clear from the scene where the adolescent 
A is afraid that he could lose control and become his father’s mur-
derer. Although the lack of affect and impulse control, as outlined, 
ran like a thread through his life-history, in this scene he was able to 
perceive the inner conflict, draw on a rudimentary capacity for men-
talization (the perception of his father’s inner state was precise), and 
cope with the situation (on the outside) thanks to an extreme form 
of affect control (he talks about putting his affects ‘on ice’). Fonagy’s 
adolescents would presumably not have been capable of controlling 
their affects in this manner: Many of them had become murderers in 
similarly humiliating situations because their impulses overflowed 
and broke through. It seems to me that one biographical difference 
between the two diagnostic groups is that the primary objects of the 
ADHD children discussed here (and/or the subgroup represented 
by Nora and A) suffered from the consequences of traumatizing 
experiences in early childhood; and that their psychically absent, 
depressive primary objects had largely proved to be incapable of 

204  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
helping them develop adequate affect and impulse regulation with 
a reliable, resonant holding and containing function, especially in 
the case of negative peak affects. The primary objects of the juvenile 
murderers described by Fonagy were extremely violent physically, 
to some extent cold and calculating, and nowhere close to being 
capable of putting themselves in their victims’ place, mentally. As 
mentioned, the result, due to an unconscious identification with the 
perpetrator and the ‘embodied memories’ of his boundless violence, 
was an extreme form of mentalization disorder, a virtual lack of 
anything like the capacity to know what another person feels like 
inside. In spite of such differences, however, I would say that the 
lines between the two diagnostic groups are fluid.
Finally, I have juxtaposed core scenes from an analysis with a 
child  and an analysis with an adult  with the implicit message that a 
psychoanalytic treatment of ADHD as early as possible could not 
only help to prevent enormous mental suffering for those who are 
affected by it, but also proves to be tremendously cost-saving in 
many respects. I chose to present the second case as an example to 
give at least some idea of the kind of social dimensions that thera-
peutic, psychosocial, and pedagogical early prevention has in chil-
dren with affect and impulse regulation disorders because, in all 
probability, it will help to avoid violence and destructiveness in 
the future.
Bibliography
Beeghly, M. and Cicchetti, D. (1994). ‘Child maltreatment, attachment, 
and the self system: Emergence of an internal state lexicon in tod-
dlers at high social risk’. Development and Psychopathology , 6: 5–30.
Bion, W.R. (1963). Elemente der Psychoanalyse.  Frankfurt a.M.: 
Suhrkamp.
Bohleber, W. (2007). ‘Erinnerung, Trauma und kollektives Gedächtnis—
Der Kampf um die Erinnerung in der Psychoanalyse’. Psyche—Z 
Psychoanal , 61: 293–332.
Brentano, F. (1997[1874]). Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint . 
London: Routledge.
Dennett, D.C. (1987). The Intentional Stance.  Cambridge: MIT Press.
Döll-Hentschker, S. (2008). Die Veränderung von Träumen in psychoana-
lytischen Behandlungen. Affekttheorie, Affektregulierung und Traumkodi-
erung.  Frankfurt a.M.: Brandes & Apsel.

EARLY AFFECT REGULATIONS AND ITS DISTURBANCES   205
Fischer, G. and Riedesser, P . (1998). Lehrbuch der Psychotraumatologie . 2. 
Aufl. München: Reinhardt, 2009.
Fonagy, P . (2007). Violent attachment. Vortrag auf der Tagung “In Gewalt 
verstrickt—psychoanalytische, pädagogische und philosophische 
Erkundungen”, Universität Kassel, 9./10.2.2007 (unpublished).
Fonagy, P . and Target, M. (2000). ‘Neubewertung der Entwicklung der 
Affektregulation vor dem Hintergrund von Winnicotts Konzept des 
“falschen Selbst”’. Psyche—Z Psychoanal.,  56: 839–62.
Fonagy, P . and Target, M. (2006[2003]). Psychoanalyse und die Psycho-
pathologie der Entwicklung.  Stuttgart: Klett-Cotta.
Fonagy, P ., Gergeley, G., Jurist, E.L. and Target, M. (2004[2002]). Affek-
tregulierung, Mentalisierung und die Entwicklung des Selbst . Stuttgart: 
Klett-Cotta.
Grubrich-Simitis, I. (2007). ‘Trauma oder Trieb—Trieb und Trauma: Wie-
derbetrachtet’. Psyche—Z Psychoanal ., 61: 637–656.
Hobson, J., Stickgold, R. and Pace-Schott, E. (1998). ‘The neuropsychol-
ogy of REM sleep dreaming’. NeuroReport , 9: R1–R14.
Jaffe, J., Beebe, B., Feldstein, S., Crown, C.L. and Jasnow, M.D. (2001). 
Rhythms of dialogue in infancy: Coordinated timing in development.  Bos-
ton [u.a.]: Blackwell.
Kernberg, O.F. (2001). ‘Object relations, affects, and drives’. Psychoana-
lytic Inquiry , 21: 604–19.
Krause, R. (1998). Allgemeine Psychoanalytische Krankheitslehre.  Bd. 2.: 
Modelle. Stuttgart/Berlin/Köln: Kohlhammer.
Krause, R. (2005). ‘Drive and affect in perverse actions’. In: 
Fonagy, P ., Krause, R. and Leuzinger-Bohleber, M. (eds). Identity, 
gender, and sexuality.  London: International Psychoanalytical Asso-
ciation. pp. 161–75.
Laplanche, J. (1996). ‘Der sogenannte Todestrieb: ein sexueller Trieb’. 
Zeitschrift für psychoanalytische Theorie und Praxis , 11: 10–26.
Leuzinger-Bohleber, M. (1984). ‘Nora. Die Analyse einer Zwölfjährigen’. 
Arbeitshefte Kinderanalyse,  Nr. 4: 29–90.
Leuzinger-Bohleber, M. (2000). ‘Wandering between the worlds: From 
an analysis of a late adolescent’. In: Klitzing, K.v. (ed.). Psychoanalysis 
in childhood and adolescence . Basel: [u.a.]: Karger. pp. 104–25.
Leuzinger-Bohleber, M. and Bürgin, D. (2003). ‘Pluralism and unity 
in psychoanalyitc research: Some introductory remarks’. In: 
Leuzinger-Bohleber, M., Dreher, A.U. and Canestri, J. (eds) Pluralism 
and unity? Methods of research in psychoanalysis.  London: International 
Psychoanalytical Association. pp. 1–25.
Leuzinger-Bohleber, M. and Pfeifer, R. (2002). ‘Remembering a 
depressive primary object: Memory in the dialogue between 

206  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
psychoanalysis and cognitive science’. International Journal of 
Psychoanalysis,  83: 3–33.
Leuzinger-Bohleber, M. (in press): Psychoanalysis as a ‘science of the 
unconscious’ at the IPA centenary. Unpublished paper given at the 
IPA centenary celebration in London, March 2010.
Parens, H. and Rose-Itkoff, C. (1997). Parenting for Emotional Growth—
Workshops on Aggression. Nicht veröffentlichtes Textbook.
Parens, H. (2010). Parenting for emotional growth: A textbook, work-
shops and curriculum for students in grades k thru 12. Philadelphia: 
Jefferson University, 1 CD.
Segal, H. (1957). ‘Notes on symbol formation’. International Journal of 
Psychoanalysis,  38: 391–439.
Stern, D.N. (1992[1985]). Die Lebenserfahrung des Säuglings . Stuttgart: 
Klett-Cotta.
Spezzano, C. (1993). Affect in psychoanalysis . Hillsdale: London: The 
Analytic Press.

PART III
PSYCHOANALYTIC RESEARCH: 
HOPES, VIEWS, CONTROVERSIAL 
DISCUSSION



209CHAPTER SEVEN
Logic, meaning, and truth 
in psychoanalytic research
Charles Hanly
On unity and verifiability in psychoanalytic theory
It has been hoped that psychoanalysis would evolve toward the 
unity of a mainstream, integrated theory based on amendments of, 
and additions to, the persisting elements of Freud’s theory (Rangell, 
1997; Hanly, 1997). In my opinion, there is little evidence of this ten-
dency occurring spontaneously. For example, there is evidence of 
an abundance of pluralism, and a poverty of unification, in the last 
issue of The Psychoanalytic Quarterly  devoted to theories of therapeu-
tic action. The eight authors stated their own theories in more or 
less splendid isolation, leaving it to the commentators to identify 
any similarities or differences that there might be. It suggests that 
the flame of hope for a unified mainstream psychoanalytic theory is 
burning low.
In terms of the ideas of convergence and divergence, the theme 
of the Chicago Congress, it would appear that divergence in theory 
and practice is on the rise and that convergence is on the decline. 
I shall argue that there is also little likelihood of a direction towards 
greater integration developing unless analysts are prepared to make 
it happen because there have been, and still are, logical, conceptual, 

210  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
and methodological barriers in its way. We have known about these 
barriers, but have tended to rationalize doing nothing about them in 
the spirit of Wallerstein’s (1988) unsustainable argument that only 
clinical theory, about which analysts agree, is descriptive while the 
rest of psychoanalytic theory is based on metaphors about which 
we can exercise the privilege of personal preference without dam-
age to psychoanalysis. Not surprisingly, as it turns out, analysts do 
not agree all that much about clinical theory either on the evidence 
of the Quarterly  issue cited above. The result is isolated division or 
passionate disagreement at the expense of dispassionate enquiry. 
Given these views, you can imagine how satisfying to me it is to find 
myself among colleagues who are passionate about enquiry; pas-
sionate enough about enquiry and psychoanalysis to enquire into 
the reliability of even one’s most passionately held ideas.
A body of knowledge may lack integrity because its theories are 
unconnected, incomplete, or inconsistent. Darwin left evolutionary 
theory incomplete; it lacked an explanation of individual variation 
which the theory required and which Mendel’s genetics was able to 
supply. It has sometimes been thought that physics is inconsistent 
because Newton’s theory of gravity is at odds with Einstein’s rela-
tivity theory. But, in fact, it is not. Newton’s theory can be derived 
from relativity theory as a special case. I propose to look at incon-
sistencies in psychoanalytic theories that result in a lack of unity in 
psychoanalytic knowledge.
There are three reasons why we should be concerned about the 
unity of psychoanalytic knowledge. The first reason is scientific and 
logical. If nature abhors a vacuum, knowledge abhors a contradic-
tion. When two psychoanalytic theories are contradictory, both can-
not be true and if one is true the other is false. Contrary theories are 
no better, since they offer only the cold comfort that although both 
cannot be true, they may both be false. Any body of knowledge that 
harbors contradictory or contrary theories has a problem. The logi-
cal inconsistency of theories renders eclecticism untenable and sets a 
specific limit to pluralism—limits beyond which contemporary psy-
choanalytic pluralism has gone.
The second reason is didactic. Candidates legitimately complain 
that they are left confused scientifically and clinically by the incon-
sistent theories and divergent clinical techniques in psychoanalysis 
taught with conviction and, too often, without scepticism or testing 

LOGIC, MEANING, AND TRUTH IN PSYCHOANALYTIC RESEARCH   211
by their adherents. Pity the conscientious candidates who try to find 
their way through the eight different theories of therapeutic action 
outlined in the Quarterly  in search of a reliable clinical orientation 
with which to work in their beginning clinical practice.
The third reason is public enlightenment. We avoid the difficult 
tasks involved in unifying psychoanalysis at the risk of promoting 
the meaningless idea that psychoanalysis is what psychoanalysts do. 
Psychoanalysis is a clinical discipline. As such, and unlike philoso-
phy which has toyed with this self-definition, it is not good enough 
for psychoanalysis to be a smorgasbord of alternative ways of inter-
preting human nature. The smorgasbord of available therapies is 
already heavily laden with alternative psychotherapies without psy-
choanalysis adding further varieties of its own.
The following question presents itself: Are we turning a blind eye 
to contradictions in contemporary psychoanalytic theory or is it just 
that there is some uncertainty and confusion resulting from a lively, 
beneficial pursuit of new and better ideas with the inevitable lag of 
their clinical trial by analysts who try them out and see how they 
work? I have listed several examples of contradictions to which, in 
my opinion, we have turned a blind eye.
1. Freud advanced two theories of aggression: one, implicit and 
undeveloped in his theorizing before 1920, the other, explicitly 
developed, formulated, and adopted—the death instinct. Freud’s 
implicit theory required no suspension of the pleasure principle. 
It was consistent with the wish fulfilment dream hypothesis and 
the hypothesis that masochism is sadism turned against the self 
(Brenner, 1971; Hanly, 1978). The death instinct theory implied 
motives that are not subject to the pleasure principle, dreams that 
are not wish fulfilments and the primary masochistic organization 
of aggression. Freud’s two theories of aggression are inconsistent. 
In particular, their implied dream theories are contradictory and 
their implied theories of the relation between masochism and 
sadism are contraries.
The inconsistency within Freud’s theory has been built into 
post-Freudian theorizing by Freudians who adopted a modifica-
tion of Freud’s first theory of aggression and those who adopted 
Freud’s second theory of aggression. The result has been a basic 

212  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
logical problem that remains scientifically unresolved within 
psychoanalytic pluralism.
Note that this problem cannot be solved by an appeal to coher-
ence. Both of Freud’s theories of aggression are coherent but they 
cannot both be true. So much logical analysis can show us. Moreo-
ver, logical analysis is, at best, only one step towards a mainstream 
theory that is as unified as possible. Further light can be shed on this 
problem by research currently in progress under the heading of con-
ceptual research into the implicit theories of analysts. Perhaps shifts 
of conviction are taking place that are not reflected in publications. 
Perhaps there is a greater tendency toward unification of theory in 
the implicit theories of analysts as distinct from their explicit report-
ing, teaching, and publishing. Even so, we would still be left with the 
crucial task of finding a reliable method to determine which implicit 
conviction about the nature of aggression is most probably true. 
Otherwise, we risk getting caught in an argumentum ad populum .
1. The classical theory of the Oedipus complex holds that the com-
plex is a developmental vicissitude of constitutionally endowed 
libidinal and aggressive drives. Identifications rooted in relations 
to parents are crucial to the resolution of the Oedipus complex 
but not to its genesis. Self-psychology holds, on the contrary, that 
it is not the vicissitudes of instinct life that causes the Oedipus 
complex; rather, it is caused by parental failure to satisfy the 
narcissistic need of their children during a phase of ‘innocent’ 
precocious sexual and aggressive flowering. Relational psychol-
ogy, for its part, considers the Oedipus complex to be an artifact 
of the relation between analyst and patient. For relational psy-
chology, interaction between the analyst and patient is a kind of 
Kantian synthetic a priori , a pure form of intuition like Kantian 
space and time, which determines what the analyst can know of 
the patient and what the patient can know of himself/herself. 
These theories are not exactly on all fours. The Freudian theory is 
psycho-biological; the Kohutian theory is psychological; the rela-
tional theory is epistemological. But, in addition to these differ-
ences, they are contradictories. If one of them is true, the others 
are false. In addition, the self-psychological and relational theo-
ries are incomplete in a respect in which the classical theory is not. 
The classical theory has an explanation of the formation, health, 

LOGIC, MEANING, AND TRUTH IN PSYCHOANALYTIC RESEARCH   213
and pathology of conscience; an explanation that is missing 
from the alternative theories.
2. The list could go on to a logical analysis of (a) Freud’s drive/
object relations/defence aetiological model as against the 
American Freudian drive/defence model and the relational 
psychology model that adopts the premise of the primacy of object 
relations; (b) the conflict model of pathogenesis versus the deficit 
model; (c) Freud’s hypothesis of narcissism as a first organization 
of libido versus the self-psychology hypothesis of an independent 
line of narcissistic development such that sexual and aggressive 
drives are derivatives of parental empathic failures; (d) Freud’s 
anaclitic theory and Bowlby’s attachment theory (see Bowlby, 
1973); and so forth.
The number of contradictions is a measure of the extent to which 
pluralism in contemporary psychoanalysis oversteps the limits of 
science and logic. Here I do no more than identify a problem. Work 
is needed to find solutions. Perhaps some of these contradictions are 
only apparent; perhaps others can be avoided by abandoning the uni-
versality of the conflicting theories. Moreover, logical analysis is, at 
best, only one step towards a viable as unitary as possible mainstream 
theory. In addition, and this is a crucial addition, we need to know 
which of two or more contradictory or contrary theories is true. As we 
have seen, the satisfaction of the coherence criterion is necessary but 
it is not sufficient to establish the truth of a theory. Independent evi-
dence is required to decide the issue. The unification of psychoanalytic 
knowledge requires us to go beyond speculation and logic to fact.
For this purpose consistent interpretation, ‘making sense of 
things’, is not enough. Freudians and self-psychologists can make 
sense of manifestations of oedipal ambivalence in associations and 
transference. Kleinians and relational psychologists can make sense 
of symptoms of oral trauma. But their explanations (the sense made 
of them) are not consistent. Interpretability in psychoanalysis can 
easily give rise to a mistaken complacency when it is used to defend 
a theory against clinical observations that falsify it and to a, no less 
mistaken, subjectivism about the possibility of intersubjective obser-
vation in clinical psychoanalysis.
Fortunately, empirical research offers us an alternative route to 
intersubjective facts about psychic development and functioning. 

214  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
In my opinion, we continue to need more empirical studies of all 
kinds but especially just now, we need outcome studies in order to 
better assess the efficacy of therapeutic psychoanalysis in its differ-
ent theoretical and technical modalities. There are many difficult 
questions that I need not expand upon for this audience: what, if 
any, difference does frequency make to therapeutic outcome? And 
the fundamental question of whether difference of theoretical orien-
tation and technique makes any difference at all to outcome? Empir-
ical research is an indispensable methodological third in our pursuit 
of psychoanalytic knowledge.
Freud conducted the first, albeit informal, outcome study when 
he observed that the cures predicted by his seduction theory and its 
technique were not occurring as the theory predicted. This histori-
cal fact is of special interest for two reasons: first, Freud’s outcome 
study led him to modify his aetiological theory to include infantile 
sexuality; it made a profound difference in his theorizing; second, 
Freud’s capacity for self-criticism enabled him to function as a third 
in relation to his own work; his commitment to a theory which he 
had published with great pride had not blinded him to the observa-
tion of negative instances—negative facts that falsified the seduction 
theory as a universal aetiology of neurosis and the adequacy of the 
cathartic method.
Psychoanalysis needs thirds—methodological vantage points 
from which observations can be made that can test psychoanalytic 
theory and therapy. Empirical and conceptual research activities, 
despite necessary overlapping, provide distinctive thirds for the 
advancement of psychoanalytic knowledge. The brief exercise above 
was intended to explore the use of logical analysis as a third. It is an 
exercise in conceptual research but, of course, logical analysis is also 
useful in empirical research. As forms of conceptual research, the 
EPF (European Psychoanalytical Federation) working groups pro-
vide yet other strategies for seeking a measure of objectivity about 
clinical psychoanalysis and training.
But what about clinical research? Are we to despair of the obser-
vational value of clinical psychoanalysis? Is clinical observation nec-
essarily irremediably vitiated by subjectivity despite the assertions 
and arguments of postmodern psychoanalysts? Is it never to reac-
quire the epistemological status claimed and exhibited by Freud on 
behalf of psychoanalysis?

LOGIC, MEANING, AND TRUTH IN PSYCHOANALYTIC RESEARCH   215
It is my hope that psychoanalysts can bring about a revival of 
clinical research. Much needs to be done. I think that the epis-
temological debate will gradually cease with the demise of the 
postmodernist vogue leaving behind a useful reminder of the dif-
ficulties that stand in the way of clinical objectivity. Therefore, 
I want to conclude with a simple proposal that is at best a small 
beginning towards making clinical psychoanalysis empirically 
viable.
My suggestion owes something to philosophy in so far as it is 
based on a modification of the verification theory of meaning of the 
Vienna Circle. The verification theory posited that the meaning of 
any statement is to be found in its verification. Hence, any state-
ment that is unverifiable is meaningless. Historically, the verifica-
tion theory was used by skeptical philosophers as a weapon against 
the high flown, elational ideas of metaphysics and, in particular, of 
Hegelian idealism and its descendents. Obviously, false statements 
are meaningful. Verifiable in this definition means ‘capable of being 
shown to be true or false’. I do not think that this definition is an 
adequate general definition of meaning (Hanly, 1970). However, in 
my opinion, it states a necessary condition for any meaningful scien-
tific statement. If so, any psychoanalytic theory, if it is to be scientific, 
must be verifiable.
Thus, in order to qualify as scientific, a psychoanalytic descrip-
tive or explanatory hypothesis must provide for inferences that 
would unambiguously specify the observations that would deter-
mine its truth or falsity. In particular, the hypothesis would need 
to inferentially and unambiguously specify negative instances, that 
is, observations that would falsify it. No idea that provides only for 
interpretative instantiation, without unambiguous descriptions of 
observations that would falsify it, could qualify as a potential addi-
tion to an evolving mainstream psychoanalytic theory.
At the present time, psychoanalysis has a plenitude of theories 
and a scarcity of significant clinical observations to test them as well 
as a lack of patients on which to make the observations. Is this con-
junction accidental? I do not know, but, just in case it might not be 
accidental, I think that Conceptual Research should include clini-
cal research with a mandate to explore, and hopefully to revive, the 
connection between psychoanalysis as a therapy and as a method of 
empirical observation.

216  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
In my opinion this connection is essential to psychoanalysis as 
therapy and as observational science. Nor does it, in my opinion, 
break the link between poetry and scientific objectivity in clini-
cal work. The scientific task of clinical psychoanalysis is rooted in 
our humanistic therapeutic obligation not to make over patients 
according to either our own best wishes and hopes for the patient 
or according to our favoured theories but, rather to help patients 
against their own wishes and fears to find themselves as they are, as 
they were, and as they can be. If we can manage this much we have 
a fallible but sufficient field of observation for an observational sci-
ence of psychic reality.
It is not just that the enlightened laity lacks a sufficient knowl-
edge of psychoanalysis to discriminate between prejudiced and rea-
soned criticisms of it; they are often at a loss to know what benefits 
clinical psychoanalysis could have for them. The lack of coherent, 
simple, accurate knowledge of psychoanalysis deprives people of a 
sufficiently informed understanding and leaves too much to chance 
when they seek therapy.
The Ptolemaic belief that the sun orbits the earth coheres beauti-
fully with, and makes sense of, our daily experience. The belief is 
consistent with using the sun for purposes of orientation in time and 
space which offers a kind of specious pragmatic test. It took man-
kind a long time to realize that immediate, unreflective, experience 
is made ‘irreducibly subjective’ by the fact that there is nothing in 
our immediate experience to indicate to us that it is we who are in 
motion and not the sun.
To adjudicate among theories we need impersonal facts of human 
psychic functioning. Logic informs us that it is not good enough to 
be able to give coherent interpretations of discernable clinical facts. 
For example, internally consistent interpretations of oedipal trans-
ferences can be constructed on contrary Freudian and Kohutian 
premises. Similarly, clinical evidence of oral trauma can be given 
a self-consistent Kleinian interpretation or an object relational Fair-
bairnian interpretation. Consistent interpretation, ‘making sense of 
things’, is not enough. We need to get beyond coherence criteria to 
reliable factual evidence and pragmatic criteria.
Above I have characterized empirical research as being second-
order clinical research because methodologically it takes up a third 
position in relation to the analytic diad. Empirical research has been 

LOGIC, MEANING, AND TRUTH IN PSYCHOANALYTIC RESEARCH   217
differentiated from conceptual research, although both need to be 
guided by the logic of theorizing discussed in a very limited way 
above. The epistemology of psychoanalysis is a topic for conceptual 
research. However, postmodernism has precipitated an epistemo-
logical controversy that will soon die down with the waning of the 
enthusiasm for the iconoclasm and the weight of its own contradic-
tions. However, its vogue is a symptom of a failure of nerve among 
analysts concerning the scientific status of their knowledge and the 
worth of their therapy. In my opinion, we do not need a revival of 
enthusiasm for psychoanalysis; we need a revival of scientific work 
by psychoanalysts both extra-clinical and clinical. For this we need 
the leadership by example and instruction as well as the results of 
the work of our researchers.
Early in the last century, the Vienna Circle of Logical Positivists 
posited the verification theory of meaning from which it followed 
that any statement that could not be verified was literally meaning-
less. With this simple postulate, the logical positivists were able to 
repudiate all metaphysical and theological statements retaining only 
natural science and common sense. While metaphysics and theology 
are unverifiable their tenets are scarcely meaningless so the logical 
positivists overplayed their hand. But the verification theory does 
surely state an essential criterion of a scientific statement. In order 
to qualify as scientific a statement must provide for inferences that 
unambiguously specify the observations that would determine its 
truth or falsity. In particular, the statement would need to inferen-
tially and unambiguously specify negative instances, that is, obser-
vations that would falsify it.
Too often interpreting is equated with testing. Candidates who 
interpret according to the premises of relational psychoanalysis are 
often enough deemed to be equally prepared for graduation with 
candidates who interpret according to the premises of classical 
theory or of self-psychology even though these premises cannot all 
be true. It does not improve the reliability of psychoanalytic knowl-
edge when analysts espouse the idea that psychic life is intrinsically 
ambiguous.
There are more methodological issues to be considered if clinical 
observation is to be adequate to the task of testing psychoanalytic 
theories. New hypotheses are essential to the growth of psychoana-
lytic knowledge but a proliferation of theories without clarification 

218  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
of their logical relation to existing and alternative theories and 
without specific methods for clinical and non-clinical evaluation 
disqualifies psychoanalysis as a body of scientific knowledge.
Like evolutionary biology at the time of Darwin, psychoanaly-
sis is an observational science. Darwin is said to have always car-
ried in his pocket as a momento a tablet, inscribed with the simple 
but profound inductive injunction, ‘Look for negative instances.’ 
No maxim of better leavens enthusiasm for an idea with enquiry. 
Our clinical work cannot proceed without anticipatory ideas but it 
will be neither scientific nor therapeutic if we fail to appreciate that 
patients are not in analysis to instantiate our theories; they come to 
be understood as they were, are, and as they can be, and not as our 
ideas require them to be.
Bibliography
Bowlby, J. (1973). Attachment and Loss, Vol. 11. Separation: Anxiety and 
Anger. New York: Basic Books.
Brenner, C. (1971). ‘The psychoanalytic concept of aggression’. Interna-
tional Journal of Psycho-Analysis , 52: 137–44.
Hanly, C. (1970). ‘On being and dreaming’. In: Hanly, C. and 
Lazerowitz, M. (eds) Psychoanalysis and Philosophy . pp. 155–87.
Hanly, C. (1978). ‘Instincts and hostile affects’. International Journal of 
Psycho-Analysis , 59: 149–56.
Hanly, C. (1997). ‘Commentary’. Journal of Clinical Psychoanalysis,  
6: 485–93.
Kohut, H. (1977). The Restoration of the Self.  New York: International 
Universities Press.
Levin, D. (1969). ‘The self: a contribution to its place in theory and 
technique’. International Journal of Psycho-Analysis , 50: 41–51.
Rangell, L. (1997). ‘At century’s end: a unitary theory of psychoanaly-
sis’. Journal of Clinical Psychoanalysis , 6: 465–84.
Wallerstein, R. (1988). ‘One psychoanalysis or many?’ International 
Journal of Psychoanalysis , 65: 5–21.

219CHAPTER EIGHT
Trauma or drive—drive and trauma: 
Revisited
Ilse Grubrich-Simitis
Preliminary note
The paper reproduced below was presented at the 44th Congress of the 
International Psychoanalytical Association in Rio de Janeiro on 29 July 
2005. The Congress theme was ‘Trauma: New Developments in Psy cho-
analysis’ and my paper formed part of a Conceptual Research Committee 
Panel on ‘What does Conceptual Research on Trauma Really Mean?’, 
chaired by Marianne Leuzinger-Bohleber and including Ricardo Bernardi, 
Jorge Canestri, and Sverre Varvin.
I had not originally intended my paper for publication, as it is substan-
tially based on my essay ‘Trauma or drive—drive and Trauma’, published 
in The Psychoanalytic Study of the Child  in 1988; some of the formula-
tions of the new text take up those of the original contribution, and certain 
passages are even reproduced verbatim from it, because I could not today 
express many of the ideas in question better or differently after a lapse of 
some twenty years. My paper was well received in Rio and many members 
of the audience stated that they would like to be able to see it in print. There 
are other arguments in favour of publication too: on the one hand, a new 
generation of psychoanalysts has since grown up, and, on the other, the 
subject matter of the earlier essay has manifestly remained relevant today 

220  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
and is considered, in the last quarter of the present paper, in the light of 
modern psychoanalytic trauma research. Finally, for the purposes of the 
oral presentation I had summarized the thoroughly elaborated ideas put 
forward in the essay, making them easier to absorb in the time available.
As stated at the beginning of the paper, it was Marianne Leuzinger-
Bohleber, as Chair of the International Psychoanalytical Association’s Con-
ceptual Research Committee, who suggested that my essay—an expanded 
version of the Thirty-Seventh Freud Anniversary Lecture held at the New 
York Psychoanalytic Institute in 1987—should be brought back into the 
debate. Although the 1980s witnessed a number of individual efforts to 
clarify psychoanalytic concepts, in the form, for example, of vocabularies 
and dictionaries, conceptual research on a quasi-institutionalized basis did 
not then exist. It is no coincidence that it now does: it could be assigned 
a particular kind of supervisory function, not in the sense of verification, 
and certainly not of orthodox censorship, but in that of a patient process 
of remembering and comparing. Incorporation of the historical dimension 
into present-day conceptual research could once again highlight the intel-
lectual wealth and human wisdom that once imbued psychoanalysis and 
were for decades the source of its fascination. This would not only con-
tribute to ensuring that the conceptual work and theoretical reflections of 
previous generations of psychoanalysts were not forgotten; the resulting 
awareness of the history of specific concepts could also have a direct impact 
on present-day psychoanalysis.
‘Present-day psychoanalysis’ might sound like a positively illusory 
expression in the age of much-vaunted pluralism. Two trends have in 
recent years blurred the outlines of our discipline: first, the narcissism of 
small—or not so small—differences, often bound up with an omnipotent 
overestimation of the explanatory force of one’s own concepts and a radical 
dismissal of those espoused by colleagues who hold other views; and, second, 
the understandable longing to be released, by ever new approaches that hold 
out the promise of simplification, from the hypercomplexity that confronts 
us in our daily clinical work. Both trends have led, and still lead, to various 
forms of reductionism. Entire areas of clinical experience are disregarded if 
it is asserted, for instance, that only the transference matters, that the here 
and now is the only relevant time plane, or that reconstructive work is of 
little therapeutic value—that is, a waste of time—because it concerns only 
explicit memory. In this situation, how likely is it that an analysand who, 
when free-associating, says something that falls outside such axiomatic 
reference systems, will be heard by an analyst who is scarcely in a position to 

TRAUMA OR DRIVE—DRIVE AND TRAUMA   221
deploy evenly suspended attention if he always thinks he knows what is and 
what is not important?
Conceptual research that reminds us of our intellectual past could not 
only encourage openness of thinking and of clinical listening, but also 
sharpen our perception of what actually connects us—in theory, concepts, 
and, above all, our particular, highly specific method. In retrospect, I see 
Marianne Leuzinger-Bohleber’s idea of returning to the subject matter of 
my essay of 1988 as a spur to engage in conceptual research of this kind. 
What in this case emerges is not only the stimulating mobility of Freud’s 
theoretical reflections on trauma and drive, but also his perceptual acuity 
in relation to certain phenomena of trauma and traumatization. For exam-
ple, his concept of the ‘compulsion to repeat’ seems to anticipate observa-
tions by present-day trauma researchers of traumatized subjects’ disturbed 
experience of time.
Dear colleagues
It was Marianne Leuzinger-Bohleber’s idea to begin our Panel 
with a summary of a paper entitled ‘Trauma or drive—drive and 
Trauma’ (Grubich-Simitis, 1988), which I published some twenty 
years ago. I must confess that my immediate response was sceptical. 
However, in view of the vast growth in the volume of psychoanalytic 
literature on trauma that has since taken place, it is, I believe, per-
fectly reasonable for the Conceptual Research Committee to set itself 
the task of recalling the complexity and variability of the trauma 
concept in certain works of Sigmund Freud. Such reconstruction 
of some of the historical lines of development seems particularly 
appropriate at this time, as there are those among us who evidently 
consider it progressive to regard the Freudian tradition as anachro-
nistic. Another aspect of this work of recollection is to understand 
the reasons why, throughout his life, Freud spontaneously reacted 
with ambivalence to newly presented trauma theories of every kind. 
Since my contribution drew attention for the first time to some of 
the fundamental elements of this conflict-ridden issue, it appears to 
be still relevant today. Indeed, a French translation came out only 
recently (Grubich-Simitis, 2003).
This essay is, however, long and complex. Owing to limita-
tions of time, I can therefore mention only a few selected points. 
The occasion for my investigation at that time was my chance 

222  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
discovery in 1983, among papers from the estate of Sándor Ferenczi, 
of the hitherto unknown manuscript of Freud’s draft of the twelfth 
metapsychological paper of 1915, entitled ‘Overview of the Trans-
ference Neuroses’ (Freud, 1985a). The fact that I then read this text 
primarily as a re-assumption of the trauma model of the aetiology of 
the neuroses, which had seemingly been totally abandoned, no doubt 
had to do with my preoccupation, at this time, with the theme of 
extreme traumatization. This interest had developed in the context of 
my clinical work, commencing in the mid-1970s, with patients from 
the second generation of Shoah survivors (Grubich-Simitis, 1981, 
1984). Unlike the present situation, in which trauma is apparently all 
the rage in psychoanalysis, in those days it was still anathema in our 
trade.
I
The draft, then, belongs in the context of the twelve metapsy-
chological papers that Freud had originally wished to bring out 
in book form. As you know, only five of these important texts, 
including ‘The Unconscious’ (Freud, 1915e) and ‘Mourning and 
Melancholia’ (Freud, 1916–1917g), were then published in the Inter-
nationale Zeitschrift für ärztliche Psychoanalyse , some in 1915 and oth-
ers in 1917. There is no trace of the other seven. It is assumed that 
Freud later destroyed the manuscripts. The sudden appearance of 
the draft of the last of the set, which Freud had sent to his friend 
Ferenczi for critical appraisal, was therefore all the more surpris-
ing. He emphasized in his accompanying letter of 28 July 1915 (see 
Falzeder and Brabant, 1996: 73) that the fair copy conformed sen-
tence by sentence to the draft. As its title indicates, his intention 
with the twelfth paper was to provide an overview or synthesis. 
The text of the draft falls into two distinct parts. The first is noted 
down in the form of telegraphic jottings only, as the author was here 
on familiar ground. He examines the three transference neuroses—
anxiety hysteria, conversion hysteria, and obsessional neurosis—in 
accordance with six factors, including repression, anticathexis, and 
the relation to the sexual function. From the sixth factor, disposition , 
he then launches, in fully written-out sentences, into the specula-
tive flight of fancy of what he himself calls his ‘phylogenetic fan-
tasy’ (in a letter to Ferenczi of 18 July 1915; ibid., p. 68). Moreover, 

TRAUMA OR DRIVE—DRIVE AND TRAUMA   223
he here also includes the ‘narcissistic neuroses’—his term for the 
psychoses.
Let me briefly outline the basic idea of this innovative second part. 
In the context of a wide-ranging review of the aetiology of mental 
pathology, Freud reconstructs, or, as the case may be, constructs, the 
events and actions that might have had hereditary repercussions on 
constitution and disposition. He ultimately traces the hereditary dis-
position to the transference neuroses back to the radical environmental 
transformations that confronted our ancestors when they were over-
taken by the climatic cataclysm of the Ice Age, which put an end to their 
former paradisiacal existence. In order to survive, they found them-
selves compelled to undertake far-reaching changes to their affective 
reactions, sexual customs, and ego capacities—characteristics that in 
Freud’s view recur in modified form in the symptoms of the transfer-
ence neuroses. As the phylogenetic substrate for the affective storms 
and ego alterations of the psychoses, he takes up theses from Totem 
and Taboo  (Freud, 1912–1913a) and sketches out a chain of postulated 
violent acts in the human primal horde that had crystallized by the 
end of the Ice Age into an archaic form of social and communal exist-
ence: to assure himself of his mastery—that is, of his total power and 
right of disposal over women—the jealous primal father persecuted 
his sons and castrated at least the older ones. The sons took flight, 
organized themselves as a homosexual clan of brothers, and eventu-
ally murdered the primal father.
Many arguments could of course be adduced for dismissing 
Freud’s construction as scientifically untenable and indeed 
abstruse. Let me mention just two. First, there is no incontrovert-
ible evidence for a Lamarckian mode of transmission; the organ-
ism’s environmental experiences cannot be incorporated directly 
into its genome, so that castration and patricide in the mists of 
prehistory could not have left a direct precipitate in the form of 
a hereditary disposition to psychosis. Second, forms of behaviour 
do not petrify and cannot therefore be discovered as fossils, so it is 
idle to rack our brains over whether actual castration and patricide 
in prehistory, of which nothing has been handed down to us on 
the level of symbols, were widespread modes of behaviour over a 
prolonged period of time.
Freud may be assumed to have been perfectly aware of these 
objections. After all, by the use of the term ‘phylogenetic fantasy’ he 

224  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
himself had drawn attention to the fantasy  character of his reflection. 
Precisely in view of the current demand for a scientific approach to 
psychoanalytic work—the word ‘scientific’ being understood in the 
strictest, if possible empirical, sense—I should like to remind you at 
this point of the description of the ‘mechanism’ of scientific creativ-
ity which Freud gave, not coincidentally, at the time of gestation of 
the draft of the twelfth metapsychological paper: he characterized 
scientific creativity as ‘the succession of daringly playful fantasy and 
relentlessly realistic criticism’ (in a letter to Ferenczi of 8 April 1915; 
ibid., p. 55). When he subjected his daringly playful phylogenetic 
fantasy to the second step, that of relentlessly realistic criticism, he 
decisively rejected and never published it.
Here, however, we wish to concentrate precisely on the first step 
in the sequence, daringly playful fantasy, which is indispensable 
to creativity in psychoanalytic research. In setting down the draft, 
Freud had fantasized his way, along neo-Lamarckian lines, towards 
answering a question that plainly never ceased to exercise him. That 
question might have been: What is the ultimate origin of the patho-
genic terror inherent in the fear of castration, the ardour of oedipal 
love wishes and death wishes, and the force of the associated guilt 
feelings? Perhaps Freud could not put an end to his surprise at the 
reality quality  of the unconscious fantasy world that he had discov-
ered in the 1890s—as if, raised in the physicalism of the 19th century 
as he was, he had told himself that something with such constant and 
massive effects in each succeeding generation must in the last analy-
sis have, or at least have had, a basis in the material external world.
In the drive model, Freud had from the beginning endowed the 
unconscious fantasies with a somatic substrate in the form of the 
erotogenic zones of the body and the associated stages of libidinal 
development, and had added a genetic foundation to them with the 
concept of hereditary disposition. In other words, he assigned the 
body—that transitional sphere between inside and outside, between 
subjectivity and objectivity—a central place within the drive model. 
At the end of his twelfth metapsychological paper he supplements 
the somatic and hereditary foundations of his drive model with a 
reflection in terms of evolutionary biology on the phylogenetic dis-
position that underlies ontogenetic disposition.
He asks himself how these inescapably active, stereotypical forms 
of programming entered into the substrate of the body in the first 

TRAUMA OR DRIVE—DRIVE AND TRAUMA   225
place. He believes he can discern in them traces of catastrophic 
environmental events and violent social acts that actually  took place 
in the external world in the mists of prehistory and which over-
whelmed our ancestors—traces that are fixed somatically and trans-
mitted by heredity, unmodified from generation to generation. In 
his phylogenetic fantasy, Freud indeed imagines these environmen-
tal events and social acts as traumatic : radical climate change, acute 
threats to life from hunger and cold, then expulsion and castration 
by the primal father, and finally the murder of the primal father.
Here, then, Freud is manifestly attempting to combine his drive 
model with elements of the trauma model. It is important to note 
that he transfers the traumatic influence into phylogenesis, thus 
separating it from present-day sufferers from psychoneurosis by 
a buffer of hundreds of millennia. In contrast to the former seduc-
tion theory, the experiences presumed to have been had by primal 
man are no longer primarily sexual transgressions. The notion of 
trauma already has a wider connotation. However, what matters for 
our present purposes is that in the twelfth metapsychological paper 
the drive model no longer appears as disjunctively opposed to the 
trauma model. In a word, the formulation is no longer trauma or 
drive, but drive and trauma.
II
With his phylogenetic fantasy Freud had indeed returned to a 
fundamental problem of his earlier research, when he developed the 
paradigm of psychoanalysis in his dialogue with Wilhelm Fliess. To 
recapitulate, my thesis is that in the second part of his twelfth meta-
psychological paper he embarked on a theoretical effort to incorpo-
rate the traumatic factors of pathogenesis into the fabric of the drive 
model. It is no coincidence that this occurred precisely in 1915, when 
Freud was witness to the extreme traumatization, both individual 
and collective, wreaked by the First World War.
We have become accustomed to discern two successively 
developed basic aetiological models in the Fliess documents and 
in Freud’s publications of this period: the trauma model and the 
drive model. The former corresponds in its most specific version to 
the so-called seduction theory and the latter to the genuinely psy-
choanalytic aetiological theory. Let me now draw together some 

226  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
historical lines which are thoroughly familiar to you. In his clinical 
work with patients in the mid-1890s, Freud often heard accounts 
of experiences of sexual seduction in childhood. This led him to 
modify the aetiological theory he had developed together with 
Josef Breuer, which had also taken traumatic experiences into con-
sideration, albeit with more emphasis on those occurring in youth 
and adulthood. From then on he attributed ever-increasing impor-
tance, in the causation of the psychoneuroses, to sexual  experiences 
sustained in childhood . According to his then perfectly conventional 
view, children who have not yet attained sexual maturity are inca-
pable of specifically sexual stimulation, sensations, and ideas, and 
are to that extent ‘innocent’. A child who is made the victim of a 
sexual scene by an adult or an older child is unable to cope with 
the experience psychically, and takes fright. If at puberty—that 
is, during the course of sexual maturation—the child has another 
experience of a kind that arouses by association the memory of 
the first experience and confers the weight of sexual significance 
on it, the mechanism of repression is set in train, and this occurs 
after the event , after a period of latency. In other words, the flooding 
with stimuli, which is this time brought about endopsychically by 
the memory, necessarily triggers the defence. Considered in these 
terms, the memory aroused after sexual maturation has an incom-
parably more powerful impact; it has ‘a greater unbinding effect’ 
(Masson, 1985a: 163; translation corrected) and is therefore more 
traumatic  than the prepubertal event itself. Admittedly, as long as 
the defence can be maintained, the situation substantially continues 
to resemble that of health. It is only the failure of the defence in any 
later conflict that gives rise to the formation of actual psychoneu-
rotic symptoms.
So even in this comparatively early version of his aetiologi-
cal theory Freud does not imagine the pathogenic effect as having 
arisen spontaneously by way of a simple mechanism of stimulus 
and response. Instead, he is postulating a diphasic  pathogenesis, cen-
tring not only on sexual seduction but also on repression. From this 
point of view, the trauma model, in the guise of the seduction theory, 
already hypothesizes a complex causal relationship in the form of 
an intricate network of external and internal—that is, social, psychic, 
and somatic—conditions that are reworked in accordance with the 
rhythm of the process of Nachträglichkeit , of deferred action.

TRAUMA OR DRIVE—DRIVE AND TRAUMA   227
Yet Freud soon came to understand ‘that there are no indications 
of reality in the unconscious, so that one cannot distinguish between 
truth and fiction that has been cathected with affect’ (ibid., p. 264). 
When further exploration compelled the realization that his patients’ 
reports of sexual seductions in childhood corresponded only in part 
to actual events, however, he did not disappointedly dismiss their 
fantasized communications as lies, but instead took these recurring 
fantasy configurations as the occasion for a further metamorphosis 
of his aetiological theory.
Against the background of a broadened conception of sexuality, 
Freud now recognized the sexual life of children, the various phases 
of libidinal development, in accordance with the erotogenic zones of 
the body assigned to them, and the structure of the Oedipus com-
plex. Since psychoneurosis betrays more of the regularities of uncon-
scious mental life and the early stages of ontogenesis, which had 
previously been subject to massive defence, than the normal adult 
constitution, he used it so to speak as the gateway to a new general  
psychology—that is, one that embraced both normal and pathologi-
cal mental phenomena: namely, psychoanalysis. What made, and to 
this day probably still makes, the drive model appear so scandalous 
is that it applies to everyone —drawing attention to the fact of our 
imperishable infantile wishes, the ineluctability of our drive-based 
nature as enshrined in our bodies, and the psychic structure that is 
at risk in all of us, because it indelibly carries within itself, by virtue 
of its early development which is so liable to disturbances, the seeds 
of neurosis, psychosis, and perversion.
As is clear from a reading of the Fliess letters, none of this suited 
Freud’s perfectly conventional bourgeois taste. Spontaneously, he 
would no doubt rather have remained faithful to the cliché of an inner 
childhood paradise, of an untroubled and harmonious parent–child 
relationship and, above all, of a sharp line of distinction between 
mental health and psychopathology. He may well have been con-
stantly tempted to revert to the trauma model. To counter this temp-
tation he as it were erected an intellectual bulwark by from then on 
elevating the admittedly major difference between the two aetiologi-
cal conceptions to the status of an antagonism. This was already true 
in 1897, when, upon the discovery of the pathogenic effect of fanta-
sies, a mainstay of his drive model, he wrote to Fliess of the ‘collapse 
of everything valuable’ (ibid., p. 266). In 1906 he stated: ‘After I had 

228  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
made this correction, “infantile sexual traumas” were in a sense 
replaced by the “infantilism of sexuality”’ (Freud, 1906a: 275); he did 
not write ‘complemented’. And it remained so later, in his official 
accounts of the history of psychoanalysis, when he condemned the 
seduction theory as purely and simply an ‘error’ (Freud, 1925d: 33). 
Yet in reality the models are not antagonistic. In fact, we have before 
us two successive and mutually complementary  versions of Freud’s 
aetiological theory, one of which, the trauma model, accentuates the 
manifest external-world aspects, while the other, the drive model, 
shifts the focus to the invisible factors of the internal world.
III
Even after his rejection of the phylogenetic fantasy, Freud persisted 
throughout his life with his efforts to integrate the trauma and drive 
models in his writings. A cursory mention of only four instances is 
possible here. In the discussion of the traumatic neuroses, based on 
the example of the war neuroses, given in the Introductory Lectures on 
Psycho-Analysis  (Freud, 1916–1917a), composed not long afterwards 
and still during the First World War, he admittedly still adopts a 
non-psychoanalytic approach. However, he stresses that traumatic 
experiences may play a part in the pathogenesis of the psychoneu-
roses too, in the sense of a ‘complemental series’ (ibid., p. 362 and 
p. 370), noting explicitly ‘that there is no need to abandon the trau-
matic line of approach as being erroneous’ (ibid., p. 276). So it is 
that in the diagram illustrating his aetiological formula in Lecture 
23, Freud includes the traumatic aspect as a causative element at 
several points. As in the phylogenetic fantasy, hereditary disposition 
is for instance once again the factor whereby he considers traumatic 
experiences of our ancestors to be active transgenerationally in our-
selves. So when patients report seductions, threats of castration and 
the like sustained in childhood, and all of these demonstrably fail 
to correspond to the facts, in his view these are not arbitrary lies 
but compelling primal fantasies —primal fantasies ‘as a phylogenetic 
endowment’ (ibid., p. 371).
The theme of primal fantasies also pervades the case history of 
the ‘Wolf Man’, likewise written down during the First World War, 
in which a real infantile seduction is central to the pathogenesis. As 
Freud emphasized: ‘the old trauma theory […] had suddenly come 

TRAUMA OR DRIVE—DRIVE AND TRAUMA   229
to the front once more’ (Freud, 1918b: 95). He here refers to the primal 
fantasies as ‘phylogenetically inherited schemata, which, like the cat-
egories of philosophy, are concerned with the business of “placing” 
the impressions derived from actual experience’ (ibid., p. 119).
Freud made another attempt to link the trauma and drive models, 
albeit admittedly excluding the phylogenetic dimension, in 1920 in 
Beyond the Pleasure Principle  (Freud, 1920g), the work in which he at 
the same time introduced the concept of the death drive. Still under 
the influence of the war neuroses, he sought to comprehend the typi-
cal rhythm of the working out and psychic binding of traumatic expe-
riences through the notion of the compulsion to repeat . He writes that 
the need for such repetitive working out arises on account of the prior 
traumatic ‘breach in the shield against stimuli’ (ibid., p. 31). Whereas 
the flooding with stimuli may be due to external  events, it can also be 
triggered by ‘excitations from within ’ (ibid., p. 34; my emphasis)—that 
is, in particular, by the drives. In this case, then, the drive is in effect 
itself  the trauma. At any rate, Freud here goes so far as to assert that 
the failure of psychic binding of such an endogenous  flooding with 
stimuli gives rise to a disturbance ‘analogous’ (ibid., p. 35) to a trau-
matic neurosis of exogenous  origin. Not long before, he had already 
noted, as a ‘unifying hypothesis’ of this kind, that ‘after all, we have 
a perfect right to describe repression, which lies at the basis of every 
neurosis, as a reaction to a trauma—as an elementary traumatic neu-
rosis’ (Freud, 1919d: 210). In relation to the concept of the compulsion 
to repeat  elaborated in Beyond the Pleasure Principle , it can at any rate 
be said—like that of primal fantasies , mentioned earlier—to be a kind 
of linking concept between the trauma and drive models.
However, it was only in old age, with Moses and Monotheism  
(Freud, 1939a), that last variation on the themes first addressed in 
Totem and Taboo , that Freud may be said to have truly re-assumed the 
‘phylogenetic fantasy’. This work, begun in Vienna under the influ-
ence of Hitler’s seizure of power and excesses of anti-Semitism, and 
completed in exile in London with a premonition of the Second World 
War and of collective extreme traumatization on an unprecedented 
scale, shows us a Freud who manifestly feels under pressure to reflect 
one last time on trauma and its effects. Once more he establishes an 
analogy between the genesis of religion and the aetiology of the neu-
roses. He inquires anew into the real traumatic events in the external 
world—the ‘historical truth’ (ibid., p. 58)—that might ultimately be 

230  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
held responsible for the intensity of conviction and the obsessional 
character of religious faith and of pathogenic fantasies alike. And yet 
again he tells his tale of those violent prehistoric acts—the murder, 
castration, or expulsion of the sons, the patricide and devouring of 
the father, and so on—which are handed down by heredity, as archaic 
heritage , in the form of primal fantasies independent of individual life 
experience. With impressive obduracy, Freud here for the last time 
stands up for his neo-Lamarckian convictions against the concep-
tions of contemporary biology, with which he was perfectly conver-
sant. It should, however, be mentioned that he does touch upon one 
other possible transgenerational mode of transmission—namely, the 
archaic, ubiquitous symbolism in language (ibid., p. 98f.).
On the level of ontogenesis, which features repeatedly in the 
Moses book, Freud counts as traumas not only sexual and aggres-
sive transgressions but also, for the first time, ‘early injuries to the 
ego (narcissistic mortifications)’ (ibid., p. 74). The concept of trauma 
is thus once again expanded, with the addition of possible wounds 
inflicted on the subject’s narcissism during the processes of primary 
structure formation, having concomitant effects in the form of per-
manent pathological alterations of the ego. So it was only in this final 
phase of his work that Freud attained the insight that ‘the ego can be 
split’ (Freud, 1933a: 58) and that with the genesis of a split-off, inac-
cessible psychical party, ‘one might say, a State within a State, […] the 
path to a psychosis lies open’ (Freud, 1939a: 76). In the context of his 
late reflections on trauma and drive, then, Freud at the end of his life 
pushed forward the investigations of the defence mechanism of split-
ting that blazed a trail for the future of our discipline (Freud, 1940a).
IV
As we know, Freud hesitated for a long time before he published 
the three essays that make up his book on Moses. This was not only 
for political reasons, but also no doubt because he was here for the 
last time pursuing his endeavour to combine the trauma and drive 
models. In the ‘Wolf Man’ case history, the publication of which he 
also deferred, he unequivocally notes the following, in the context 
of the relative aetiological significance to be assigned to infantile 
fantasies on the one hand and to real traumatic childhood experi-
ences on the other: ‘I admit that this is the most delicate question in 

TRAUMA OR DRIVE—DRIVE AND TRAUMA   231
the whole domain of psycho-analysis. […] no doubt has troubled 
me more; no other uncertainty has been more decisive in holding 
me back from publishing […]’ (Freud, 1918b: 103n). Freud manifestly 
held fast throughout his life to the attitude formed during the Fliess 
period—namely, the fear that the comparatively inoffensive trauma 
model, with its direct appeal to common sense, might jeopardize the 
then radically new, disagreeable, ‘more difficult and more improb-
able’ (ibid., p. 103n) drive model. When Otto Rank published his 
theory of the trauma of birth in 1924, Freud was alarmed lest ‘our 
ingenious etiological construction be superseded by the crude birth 
trauma’ (letter to Ferenczi of 26 March 1924; Falzeder and Brabant, 
2000: 135; translation corrected). The tragic alienation from Sándor 
Ferenczi at the beginning of the 1930s, too, was ultimately attribut-
able to the latter’s highly original work on the traumatic  experiences 
of very young children in relation to their primary objects—actually 
a kind of psychophysical aetiological trauma theory based on the 
first description and conceptual outline of what we nowadays call 
narcissistic personality disorders and borderline pathology.
As described above, Freud was assailed by conflict even in his 
own attempts to make progress in reconciling the two chains of 
causation, held back as he was by ambivalence. Put as starkly as 
possible, his concern could be summarized as follows: by drawing 
attention, in the aetiology of the neuroses, to the external traumatic  
factors, which are substantially apprehended via the visual sense—
the perceptual modality whereby reality is most tellingly conveyed 
to us—one is wittingly or unwittingly opening up an escape hatch 
from the repulsive, threatening, and invisible unconscious internal  
world that so hurtfully dominates our feeling and thinking. Such a 
path might tend to lead away from psychoanalysis altogether. Given 
the helplessness and vulnerability of the human infant and child, 
Freud himself never lost sight of the external causal factors in the 
genesis of neurosis. However, in his published works he mentioned 
them explicitly as rarely as possible. For him, the traumatic element 
was always so to speak taken for granted and allowed for in the 
background together with other considerations.
For decades this attitude has been handed down from one gen-
eration of psychoanalysts to the next, presumably on a more uncon-
scious than conscious level. Hence the fallacious impression that 
psychoanalysts refuse to perceive and take seriously the weight of 

232  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
the external world and the harmful effect of real traumas. Without 
making a fuss about it, since Freud’s day they have in fact by no 
means concerned themselves solely with pathogenic fantasies, 
dreams, and drive vicissitudes, but have also at all times taken 
account of the direct and indirect consequences of traumatization 
due to flooding with stimuli from outside. This is so when they 
investigate the potential effects of the loss of one or both parents, 
physical and/or mental disability in siblings, illness in the sub-
ject himself or herself, surgical operations or hospitalizations, and 
so forth, during the course of childhood development, or, say, the 
possible consequences of war, torture, social, and cultural deraci-
nation, serious accidents, natural catastrophes, and so on, in adult-
hood. Although we are repeatedly warned not to overstretch the 
concept of trauma, it is nevertheless the case that exploration of the 
influence of pathological internal states and cumulatively harmful 
forms of behaviour by the primary objects on babies and young chil-
dren belongs in this context. Finally, the study—even if commenced 
only after a prolonged phase of latency—of the effects of the Shoah 
on survivors and their offspring, as well as on the persecutors’ 
children and grandchildren, has documented the preparedness of 
psychoanalysts to engage with the consequences of extreme trau-
matizations due to a real crime of unique proportions.
Was, and is, there any justification for Freud’s concern that we 
might be tempted to exit from psychoanalysis as it were at the 
trauma end? In the 1980s and 1990s at any rate, the answer might 
well have been yes. At this time a storm was whipped up by the 
abstruse theories of Jeffrey Masson (1984) to the effect that, out of 
cowardice and opportunism, Freud had suppressed the true seduc-
tion theory in favour of untrue psychoanalysis. The clamorous 
debate about sexual abuse flared up at about the same time. These 
two media events abruptly highlighted the intensity of the need, felt 
by specialists and the general public alike, to cast off the complex-
ity and travail inherent in genuine psychoanalytic thought by one-
sidedly focusing on trauma.
V
Undisconcerted by, and independently of, this commotion, which 
has now died down, the psychoanalytic community has since 

TRAUMA OR DRIVE—DRIVE AND TRAUMA   233
continued the work commenced by Freud on bringing the trauma 
and drive models together. One comparatively spectacular sign of 
these efforts is the debate on the rediscovery and re-evaluation of 
the late work of Sándor Ferenczi—a debate that, despite the extreme 
polarization of its early stages, has now after all more or less ended 
in a substantial degree of integration. In this way a theoretical effort 
became manifest and ultimately impossible to overlook—an effort 
which, as retraced in my paper, Freud had begun quietly and in out-
line only, and which, no doubt partly with Ferenczi’s advance reso-
nating in his mind, he had pursued with greater intensity in his late 
work. Each in their own specific way, great psychoanalytic minds 
of subsequent generations such as Balint, Winnicott, Bion and, now, 
André Green, to name but a few, have continued this effort.
So the question Freud sought in vain to answer in the phyloge-
netic fantasy with its quasi-mythological transmission construct 
has since spawned new, less speculative hypotheses on transgen-
erational transmission. The metapsychological issue of aetiology, on 
which Freud’s highly abstract reflections on trauma once centred, 
remains a focus of interest. However, it is mainly concrete clini-
cal work, especially with extremely traumatized patients, that has 
yielded an impressively abundant phenomenology of the process 
and consequences of traumatization, as reflected in the latest psy-
choanalytic literature on the subject. In particular, it has been pos-
sible to give an even more specific description of the typical forms of 
defence deployed by trauma victims in the service of their psycho-
physical survival during and after exposure to traumatization.
In the theoretical, conceptual elaboration of the results of their 
research, the authors take account, as in the past, of the classical 
economic point of view, which is indispensable precisely in the 
context of trauma. But they benefit, too, from the psychoanalytic 
theory of object relations, now further elaborated. In this connec-
tion, however, it is easy to overlook the fact that the seeds of this 
relational expansion of the allegedly wholly solipsistic classical con-
cepts were already sown in Freud’s texts—in particular, ‘Mourning 
and Melancholia’ (see Ogden, 2002). The authors also exploit the 
progress made in the psychoanalytic understanding of the fun-
damental importance of the capacity for symbolization. We now 
understand better that—and why—massive traumatization due to 
flooding with external stimuli, together with the ego-paralyzing 

234  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
automatic anxiety that is thereby internally triggered, can actually 
lead to the lasting demolition of psychic structure. The annihilation 
of internalized good object representations—note that the issue is 
the loss not only of objects but of object representations—coupled 
with the loss of the capacity for symbolization that imparts mean-
ing, has the consequence that the traumatic event in all its crudity 
persists only in the victim’s body, and is thus pseudo-represented 
somatically. Besides massive bodily sensations, the predominant 
subjective experience is of disorientation along the chronologi-
cal continuum of past-present-future—that is, in essence, personal 
timelessness—as well as total hopelessness and loneliness, extreme 
distrust, and the unimaginability of empathic concern.
The authors are manifestly agreed that where the capacity for 
symbolization has been destroyed, even the most rudimentary work-
ing out of the traumatic experience cannot get under way without 
psychotherapeutic help. It seems imperative for a good, empathic 
object in the shape of the analyst to make itself available in reality . 
The analyst must be capable of overcoming the disbelief, disavowal, 
and spontaneous refusal of empathy that are always and inevita-
bly aroused by confrontation with the consequences of extreme 
traumatization. He or she must be prepared to take upon himself 
or herself the catastrophic burden of the trauma, and must attempt 
to symbolize what actually  happened, to order it in the dimension 
of time (that is, to re-establish temporality) and also to reconstruct 
it historically—and all this must be done affirmatively rather than 
through interpretation. In the real, hope-creating experience of relat-
ing to the therapist, it may be possible for the patient, in small steps 
on the boundary between the somatic and the psychic, as it were, 
to reacquire a good internal object and the mental capacity for the 
formation of representations—that is, for binding extreme quanti-
ties of excitation. In other words, the issue in such treatments is at 
first nothing less than recovery of the structural prerequisites for the 
working out of the cataclysmic effects of the trauma. This working 
out, for its part, proceeds by way of a narration to be created jointly 
by patient and analyst, which must be intimately connected with the 
actual traumatic reality in the form of a historical reconstruction.
One is struck by the extent to which the attention of today’s psy-
choanalytic trauma researchers is focused on the therapeutic proc-
ess, on the treatment technique and, even more specifically, on the 

TRAUMA OR DRIVE—DRIVE AND TRAUMA   235
real relationship between patient and therapist. Some connotations 
of the concept of the real relationship are, of course, also included in 
the modern concepts of ‘therapeutic holding’ or ‘therapeutic contain-
ing’. At this point I should like to forge a further link to the Freudian 
tradition. There is in my view a correspondence between the theo-
retical pair of concepts ‘trauma model/drive model’ on the one hand 
and the clinical pair of concepts ‘real relationship/transference rela-
tionship’ on the other. The trauma model and the real relationship 
appeal directly to common sense, whereas the drive model and the 
transference relationship represent the more difficult, more improb-
able, truly novel, and genuinely psychoanalytic conception. I said 
earlier that Freud always took the traumatic element for granted, 
comparatively seldom discussing it explicitly  in his works, and the 
same is no less true of the aspects of the real analyst-patient rela-
tionship. In his writings on technique he predominantly stressed 
the transference relationship, presumably for the same reasons that 
induced him to give priority to the drive model in the aetiology of 
the neuroses.
We know from the numerous surviving reports of his analysands 
that he in fact assigned a great deal of space for the real relationship 
to unfold and certainly attributed considerable therapeutic signifi-
cance to it. Late in life he complained that in the matter of clinical 
technique he had often been misunderstood because in his writings 
he had mainly emphasized the perils that were liable to hinder the 
development of the analytic process; for this reason his recommen-
dations had been predominantly negative, directed towards what 
was if at all possible to be avoided  (see, for example, a letter to Fer-
enczi of 4 January 1928; Falzeder and Brabant, 2000: 332). Extracts 
from notes made by Max Eitingon on the first meeting of the Vienna 
Psychoanalytic Society he attended in 1907 have recently been pub-
lished. He records that Freud said in his intimate circle: ‘The secret 
of our activity is that healing is healing through love.’ According to 
Eitingon, Freud often repeated this statement orally. It may, how-
ever, be assumed that in a written text, and certainly in one intended 
for publication, he would be more likely to have used the term 
‘aim-inhibited love’. Yet Eitingon added in his notes that especially 
in the case of particularly difficult patients—perhaps including 
traumatized ones?—Freud also considered that by ‘supreme per-
sonal  effort’ it might still be possible to reach such patients, ‘but this 

236  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
would be at the cost of one’s skin’. This was expressed even more 
tellingly as follows: ‘More can be achieved in the treatment, but then 
one would have to cut strips out of one’s own skin’ (see Freud and 
Eitingon, 2004h: 938). This radical image is so to speak the unofficial, 
interpersonal anti-metaphor to his official, highly distanced likening 
of the analyst to a surgeon or a mirror. Having ‘to cut strips out of 
one’s own skin’ at any rate graphically conveys the enormous strain 
imposed by therapeutic work with severely traumatized patients, 
where the real relationship between analyst and patient appears to 
be the very foundation upon which the therapy may in favourable 
cases after all succeed.
In conclusion, what I—and no doubt also Marianne Leuzinger-
Bohleber—wanted to demonstrate by this presentation to our Panel 
is as follows. As psychoanalysts we possess a rich intellectual tradi-
tion that deserves to be remembered, and is and remains susceptible 
to extension in every direction. If something new is discovered, it 
can be integrated, and at the same time untenable earlier conceptions 
can of course be relinquished. However, this tradition, which, now 
as in the past, is inspiring not least by the questions it raises, need 
not be devalued as it sometimes is today. We are fortunate in having 
Sverre Varvin as a member of our Panel. On the basis of the concep-
tual tradition I have summed up in the phrase ‘drive and trauma’, 
and by virtue precisely of his openness to the concepts of other dis-
ciplines, such as, say, semiotics, as well as of his extensive clinical 
experience with severely traumatized patients, he has made innova-
tive and in many respects also integrative contributions (including 
Varvin, 2000, 2002, 2003) to present-day genuinely psychoanalytic 
trauma research.
Bibliography
Falzeder, E. and Brabant, E. (eds) (1996). The Correspondence of Sigmund 
Freud and Sándor Ferenczi , vol. 2, 1914–1919. Cambridge, Mass. and 
London: Harvard University Press.
Falzeder, E. and Brabant, E. (eds) (2000). The Correspondence of Sigmund 
Freud and Sándor Ferenczi , vol. 3, 1920–1933. Cambrdige, Mass. and 
London: Harvard University Press.
Freud, S. (1906a). ‘My View on the Part Played by Sexuality in the Aeti-
ology of the Neuroses’. S.E., 7: 271–79.
Freud, S. (1912–1913a). Totem and Taboo. S.E. , 13: 1–161.

TRAUMA OR DRIVE—DRIVE AND TRAUMA   237
Freud, S. (1915e). ‘The Unconscious’. S.E., 14: 166–204.
Freud, S. (1916–1917a). Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis. S.E.,  15–16.
Freud, S. (1916–1917g). ‘Mourning and Melancholia’. S.E.,  14: 222–35.
Freud, S. (1918b). ‘From the History of an Infantile Neurosis’. S.E.,  17: 
7–122.
Freud, S. (1919d). ‘Introduction to Psychoanalysis and the War Neuro-
ses’. S.E., 17: 207–10.
Freud, S. (1920g). Beyond the Pleasure Principle . S.E., 18: 7–64.
Freud, S. (1925d). An Autobiographical Study . S.E., 20: 7–70.
Freud, S. (1933a). New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis . S.E., 22: 
5–182.
Freud, S. (1939a). Moses and Monotheism . S.E., 23: 1–137.
Freud, S. (1940a). ‘Splitting of the Ego in the Process of Defence’. S.E., 
23: 275–78.
Freud, S. (1985a[1915]). Übersicht der Übertragungsneurosen: Ein bisher 
unbekanntes Manuskript . Ediert und mit einem Essay versehen von 
I. Grubich-Simitis. Frankfurt am Main: S. Fischer. (English edition: 
Freud, S. A Phylogentic Fantasy: Overview of the Transference Neuroses . 
Edited and with an essay by I. Grubrich-Simitis. Cambridge, Mass. 
and London: Harvard University Press, 1987.)
Freud, S. and Eitingon, M. (2004h). Briefwechsel 1906–1939 , vol. 2, ed. 
Schröter, M. Tübingen: edition diskord.
Grubrich-Simitis, I. (1981). ‘Extreme Traumatization as Cumulative 
Trauma: Psychoanalytic Investigations of the Effects of Concentra-
tion Camp Experiences on Survivors and Their Children’. The Psycho-
analytic Study of the Child , 36: 415–50.
Grubrich-Simitis, I. (1984). ‘From Concretism to Metaphor: Thoughts on 
Some Theoretical and Technical Aspects of the Psychoanalytic Work 
with Children of Holocaust Survivors’. The Psychoanalytic Study of the 
Child , 39: 301–19.
Grubrich-Simitis, I. (1988). ‘Trauma or drive—drive and Trauma: 
A Reading of Sigmund Freud’s Phylogenetic Fantasy of 1915’. The 
Psychoanalytic Study of the Child , 43: 3–32. The German text appeared 
in Psyche , 41: 992–1023, 1987. Translated from the German by Philip 
Slotkin.
Grubrich-Simitis, I. (2003). ‘Trauma ou pulsion—pulsion et trauma: 
Leçons à partir de la “fantasie phylogénétique” écrite par Sigmund 
Freud, en 1915’. In: Green, A., Grubrich-Simitis, I., Laplanche, J. and 
Schimek, J.G. Sur la théorie de la séduction . (Libres cahiers pour la psy-
chanalyse, Etudes.) Paris: Editions In Press, 19–54.
Masson, J.M. (1984). The Assault on Truth: Freud’s Suppression of the Seduc-
tion Theory . New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.

238  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
Masson, J.M. (ed.) (1985a). The Complete Letters of Sigmund Freud to 
Wilhelm Fliess, 1887–1904 . Cambridge, Mass. and London: Harvard 
University Press.
Ogden, T. (2002). ‘A New Reading of the Origins of Object-Relations 
Theory’. The International Journal of Psychoanalysis , 83: 767–82.
Varvin, S. (2000). ‘Die gegenwärtige Vergangenheit: Extreme Tramati-
sierung und Psychotherapie’. Psyche , 54: 895–930.
Varvin, S. (2002). ‘Body, Mind and the Other: Mentalising Extreme Expe-
riences’. In: Varvin, S. and Stajner Popovic, T. (eds) Upheaval: Psycho-
analytic Perspectives on Trauma . Belgrade: International Aid Network. 
pp. 153–191.
Varvin, S. (2003). ‘Extreme Traumatisation: Strategies of Mental Sur-
vival’. International Forum of Psychoanalysis , 12: 5–16.

239CHAPTER NINE
Pluralism in theory and in 
research—and what now?1 
A plea for connectionism
Anna Ursula Dreher
Abstract
For a long time now there has been an analytic discussion about the 
pluralism of theories; the author proposes that there is a second plural-
ism we must pay attention to, namely the one in the analytic research 
field. Introductory remarks on the development of conceptual research 
serve as reference  to highlight the two pluralisms—relating to the 
Green-Wallerstein-debate about the common ground  in psychoanalysis; 
and relating to considerations about the scientific status of psychoa-
nalysis and about some current understandings of analytic research.
Psychoanalysis as a science ‘between nature and culture’ 
(in Green’s and Wallerstein’s words) would have to take both nature 
and culture into account, not only in its theoretical concepts but also 
in research and methodology. In doing so it would be desirable not 
only to lament those two pluralisms, but to understand both posi-
tively as resources in the search for the best problem solutions.
The author criticizes the idea of an unchangeable common ground  
in psychoanalysis. She points to Freud’s work as historical  ground, 
understanding Freud’s image of man [ Menschenbild ] and his interest 
in knowledge [ Erkenntnisinteresse ] as a possible common backdrop for 

240  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
a constructive analytic discourse—against which a common ground 
would have to be worked out anew again and again. The prerequisites 
for such systematic ‘controversial discussions’ and for a connectionist 
view are discussed, which is seen as a workable alternative to funda-
mentalism or to a resigning acceptance of an arbitrary pluralism.
For many analysts who mainly work in clinical practice and who 
have an interest in research questions, our analytic research litera-
ture is meanwhile probably not so easy to survey. This is because 
there is not only the methodological interplay between conceptual 
and empirical aspects  of any type of research, but because there are 
also many different subject areas  of psychoanalytic research: psy-
chotherapy research with process and outcome analyses, develop-
mental research, and historical research or, for instance, conceptual 
research. There are many interesting studies on the most varied top-
ics using different research paradigms. One can also find very dif-
ferent proposals to organize this psychoanalytic research field, a lot 
of classifications and divisions. So I can only attempt to shed some 
light on this vast field. I would like to do this from a basic perspec-
tive, namely, an epistemological one. Reflections of this kind are 
necessary from time to time, but are unfortunately also somewhat 
dry. André Green (2005: 629) has this in mind when he says: ‘ Reflec-
tion on the fundamental postulates of divergent theories is not the most 
beloved exercise of psychoanalysts ’. It is surely not ‘the most beloved’ 
exercise—but we know that, regrettably, the universe ‘Beyond the 
Pleasure Principle’ cannot be ignored … definitely not for long.
I would like to present my reflections using the example of con-
ceptual research, and begin with a few remarks on the development 
of this research area, in the course of which I will also refer to my 
own way to conduct conceptual research. This introduction will 
result in a brief development of some ideas on science and research 
in psychoanalysis in order to discuss—against the background of 
the pluralism in our analytic theories and of the debate about the 
common ground —a second pluralism in the field of psychoanalytic 
research; and will end with a plea for a ‘connectionist’ view.
Some thoughts on the development of conceptual research
My first contact with conceptual research was in the 1980s at the 
Sigmund-Freud-Institute in Frankfurt, Germany, through a research 

PLURALISM IN THEORY AND IN RESEARCH   241
project initiated together with Joseph Sandler—discussing methods 
to explore the usage of concepts. At the time, the mere label ‘con-
ceptual research’ provoked a certain scepticism amongst analytic 
researchers. One could study the Unconscious, the process and out-
come of analyses, child development, and even specific illnesses—
but concepts? How could that be done? Not only was our research 
subject considered strange by many, it also did not fit into the 
Zeitgeist:  since the 1970s, neopositivistic empiricism has begun to 
gain ground in the analytic research field, not accidentally accom-
panied by an increasing medicocentrism  (cf. Jacoby, 1983; Parin and 
Parin-Matthèy, 1986), which often regards psychoanalysis merely as 
a form of psychotherapy practised by physicians and psychologists, 
and which, for instance, sees few problems in adapting our nosol-
ogy to the system of the International Statistical Classification of 
Diseases and Related Health Problems (ICD). It was not surprising 
then, that our project’s ‘conceptual research’ at the time often met 
with an understanding that equated analytic research generally with 
analytic psychotherapy research. Quantitative-empirical psycho-
therapy researchers wanted to explore measurable aspects of inner 
and outer reality by using objective and reliable methods, but they 
did not make the use of analytic concepts their explicit topic of study. 
Clinicians also do research, they explore themselves, their patients, 
and the analytic situation, for instance, how unconscious processes 
work in the interplay of transference and counter-transference—but 
clinicians also usually do not systematically make the use of analytic 
concepts the topic of their research. Our Frankfurt research group, 
however, considered that a methodically well founded examination 
of the variety that exists in the use of analytic concepts, its change 
over time, and the imprecise and, at times, contradictory, use, would 
be a worthwhile undertaking.
What do we mean by ‘conceptual research’?
The phrase ‘conceptual research’ has meanwhile become famil-
iar to many, but has also suffered something of the same fate 
which we know from analytic concepts: different authors use 
it with different meanings. The phrase actually is a contrac-
tion; originally  it did not designate the conceptual aspects of any 
research, but rather:

242  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
 the systematic investigation of different uses of concepts in 
different analytic cultures;
 the investigation of the historical change of the meaning of a con-
cept over time; and
 the attempt to formulate proposals for a reasonable, clinically 
rich, and meaningful use (for a systematic introduction cf. Dreher, 
2005).
‘Conceptual research’ is normally connected with the name of Joseph 
Sandler who introduced it into the analytic literature. The unfold-
ing and constant differentiation of our concepts was one focus of 
the kind of conceptual studies which Sandler had proposed and 
had then carried out himself with different colleagues. This began 
with his work in the so-called ‘concept group’ at the Hampstead 
Index (Anna-Freud Centre London), continued with the Frankfurt 
research group, and included the work he had done together with 
Anne-Marie Sandler on past and present unconscious , and the work 
on internal object relations (Sandler and Sandler, 1999). The validity 
and usefulness of analytic concepts must show themselves in clini-
cal practice. Sandler was convinced that the analytic situation was 
not only the place for this justification, but also the place where con-
cepts arise, or where their meanings can change. These changes, in 
the beginning, tend to occur silently and implicitly. The Frankfurt 
research group (Sandler et al. , 1987) had thought up a set of methods 
to make the boundary between the analysts’ implicit  and explicit  con-
cept use more permeable—between explorative, carefully tentative 
attempts in the analytic situation and the ‘official’ communications 
about how concepts are understood. Only through publication can 
new ideas be made explicit, and only through discussion can these 
proposals be criticized (see Canestri, 2006).
A central intention of Sandler’s research work on concepts was to 
elicit these processes of conceptualization as they occur during clini-
cal work, and as a direct result, to make suggestions for improved 
concept usage. This work in turn, especially the joint work in Frank-
furt on the changes in the use of the concept ‘psychic trauma’, later 
became the practical example and the starting point for me to intro-
duce epistemological and methodological reflections about the role 
and status of such a conceptual research programme (Dreher, 2000). 
We normally use our analytic concepts quasi-automatically; they are 

PLURALISM IN THEORY AND IN RESEARCH   243
our categories when we describe, organize, and communicate our 
thoughts and experiences in language. We are certain of this usage, 
usually without being aware of problems, as long as we do not leave 
our respective analytic culture. It requires some effort to take a dis-
tanced and reflective attitude when our own concept use is being put 
to the test. A very human problem, obviously, and one to which Lewis 
Carroll once hinted: ‘When I use a word,’ Lewis Carroll has Humpty 
Dumpty say in a rather scornful tone to Alice, ‘it means just what 
I choose it to mean—neither more nor less.’ ‘The question is,’ replies 
Alice, ‘whether yon can make words mean so many different things.’ 
‘The question is,’ retorts Humpty Dumpty, ‘which is to be master—
that’s all’ (quoted after Carroll 1960/70: 269 [orig. 1872]). Indeed, 
when someone is criticized for his or her concept usage, this may 
provoke different affects. Some react with ‘a rather scornful tone’, 
and often the question is asked: Who has the monopoly of interpreta-
tion over concepts? Who is the ‘master’ in the house? Of course there 
are not only ‘personal’, but also other factors which make the study 
of concepts complicated. These are factors such as the consequences 
of psychoanalysis being embedded into different cultures, into dif-
ferent medical and thus economic systems of different countries, and 
so forth; epistemologically speaking: the consequences of the embed-
ding of our concepts into different language games.
About the change of concepts
Concepts do change; this they have in common with scientific theo-
ries and world views. Freud (1915: 117) confronted the changes of 
his concepts with equanimity: ‘The advance of knowledge … does 
not tolerate any rigidity … in definitions. … even basic concepts that 
have been established in the form of definitions are constantly being 
altered in their content’. In the history of psychoanalysis, many the-
ories, models, and concepts have come under pressure to change, 
even ‘basic concepts’. But: not everything old is bad, and not eve-
rything new is good. Green (2005: 631) refers to the relevance of the 
‘old’ classic literature, when he, somewhat wistfully, complains, that 
Freud is today ‘no longer an author worth reading’. Green is right; of 
course, Freud should be read, not for reasons of idolatry, but because, 
up to this day, Freud’s intentions and also parts of our psychoana-
lytic history are preserved in our concepts—this is especially so for 

244  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
our clinical concepts. As a result, this makes an important demand 
on our research: to find a prudent balance between preservation and 
change in the ‘advance of knowledge’.
Thomas Kuhn (1962) has compellingly shown how change 
processes occur in scientific theories; they do not only proceed in 
a linear, continuous way, but often by crisis-like leaps. He has also 
shown that scientific progress happens not only through the steady 
accumulation of new research findings in times of normal science. 
Progress can also be initiated through paradigm change, for exam-
ple through new methods, through changes in the scientific world 
view, or in mentalities. Prominent examples for such processes of 
change in the life sciences are the movement towards cognitive 
science, towards evolutionary biology, or nowadays, to the neuro-
sciences. Changes in concepts occur rather similarly. Right now we 
can notice how concepts from the cognitive memory research such 
as ‘declarative and procedural memory’ gradually flow into our ana-
lytic concepts about memory and the unconscious. Let me highlight 
one important finding from Kuhn’s studies: changes in scientific 
theories—and I think this is also true for changes in the meaning of 
concepts—are not only based on scientific arguments. A number of 
other non-negligible, but well-known parameters, are, for instance, 
struggles for institutional power, for prestige and dominance, or 
simply for research money grants. Another known parameter is a 
kind of territorial thinking, the insistence on such conceptual under-
standings as they have been codified by idealized authorities. All of 
these influences affecting the meaning of our concepts are at times 
opaque and certainly difficult to grasp; nonetheless, they constitute 
the background for different concept usages.
Problems of the variety in concept use—and an attempted 
solution
Differences in the understanding of even central concepts do not 
always receive the same evaluation from the analytic community: to 
some, this is a lamentable Babel of languages, to others, it is not. Some 
recognize a creative evolutionary potential in this manifoldness, oth-
ers see a danger for the consistency of our theory. There are good 
reasons behind both points of view. Nevertheless, the, to my mind, 
justified complaints about the semantic vagueness  of our concepts and 

PLURALISM IN THEORY AND IN RESEARCH   245
about their inconsistent usage have predominated for quite some 
time. These complaints make us irrefutably aware of a—from a sci-
entific point of view—severe problem regarding the meaning of our 
concepts. The question remains: how can we actually guarantee that 
we are all referring to the same clinical phenomena and that we all 
mean the same thing when we use the same concept?
The idea that conceptual research could offer a constructive con-
tribution to solving this problem and thus might yield gains for clini-
cal work and scientific endeavours, has become accepted by many in 
contemporary psychoanalysis. The Hampstead Index and later the 
Frankfurt research group had initially used Sandler’s phrase ‘con-
ceptual research’ only as a working title. But in the last decade the 
label has in fact established itself. In this sense ‘conceptual research’ 
is indeed a historically grown phrase, but, of course not a protected, 
patented one, and nowadays it is also itself being used with different 
meanings: its usage spans quite a range from conceptual reflection to 
systematic conceptual research. Therefore, it appears to make sense, 
to take another, closer look at the history of the origin of conceptual 
research. What is specific about it? The phrase ‘conceptual research’ 
in fact refers to a special kind of empirical phenomena , namely the use 
of concepts. It describes activities related to the systematic investiga-
tion of analytic concepts in their clinical and extra-clinical usage. It is 
thereby assumed that a concept does not stand alone in the world, but 
rather is situated in connection with other concepts in a conceptual 
field, and that it is not used solipsistically by individual analysts, but 
rather by different members of a specific scientific community. There-
fore, empirical questions must be answered first and foremost: in 
addition to the question of how one understands and uses a concept, 
it must be clarified how others understand and use it. Consequently, 
the procedure of our Frankfurt research study included, along 
with the always important conceptual reflections , a series of further 
methodical steps, and was oriented at the following beliefs:
 Conceptual research—like other complex research activities 
today—requires teamwork by researchers who are connected 
through a common research interest; at best they come from dif-
fering perspectives and disciplines.
 Besides selecting concepts of interest, it is necessary to consider 
the 'sample' of users, namely: which concept users are relevant for 

246  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
answering the research questions, which analysts, which experts, 
and whom from neighbouring disciplines?
 The collection and evaluation of data are based on a research-
 design which has to specify precisely the kind of data to be gained 
through the application of what type of methods, from which indi-
viduals, and over what timeframe. The Frankfurt research group, 
which here serves only as programmatic prototype, implemented 
for the investigation of the trauma concept—in addition to a system-
atic literature analysis—semi-structured interviews with a number 
of trauma experts. Then, the method of group discussion was used 
for evaluating the data. Of course, other qualitative or quantitative, 
philological or hermeneutic methods, can also be used.
Conceptual research as a standardized procedure does not exist, just 
as psychotherapy research as such or the experiment as such do not 
exist. Conceptual research, therefore, is not a concrete method, but 
rather a research programme .
As to its procedure, it is:
 empirical, by investigating and describing the meaning space and 
actual usage of a concept in the context of interest;
 historico-reconstructive, by tracing the development of a concept 
through essential points of change; and
 evaluative, by critically discussing the collected data and by 
working out meaning aspects of a concept which, from an ana-
lytic perspective, are indispensable, and perhaps by also making 
suggestions for better concept use.
It is understood that those aspects can only be grasped with different 
methods, and in so far conceptual research is always multimethodical.  
It is therefore, in my view, a central misunderstanding in the current 
discussions on the methodological status of conceptual research if 
it is equated with qualitative research, or if it is demarcated from 
quantitative-empirical research. It may have become clear by now 
that conceptual research—as it was conceptualized—may make use 
not only of qualitative, but also of quantitative, methods. Methods 
are a means to an end, and the all-important question is whether 
or not they serve this end. Other research approaches may define 
themselves by the methods they deem admissible; conceptual research 

PLURALISM IN THEORY AND IN RESEARCH   247
defines itself by its subject matter, the use of concepts, and by its aim, the 
clarification of the meaning of concepts.
Possible elements of a conceptual research programme
Thus, the first phase of a research programme may be concerned 
with methods that examine the logical consistency of concepts; 
another phase may be about the objective and reliable measuring 
of a concept’s usage with the help of standardized instruments. 
Nevertheless—as the work on concepts has to do essentially with 
the use of language and with meaning aspects—it is obvious that 
the analysis of our analytic literature, the interpretation of expert 
interviews, or the critical discussion in a research team, are central 
aspects; that is, the application of hermeneutic methods, with which 
we analysts are indeed very familiar. In the course of such a research 
process, a concept is being tested again and again from new vantage 
points. In this, the respective individual pre-knowledge within the 
research team, and also the joint knowledge, systematically acquired 
in the course of the work, serve as a background. This procedure 
has the purpose of gradually elaborating the relevant meaning field 
of a concept. Such ‘working through’ is at its best that ‘progres-
sive spiral’ which was described in the context of the Hampstead 
Index. Structured reflection and discussion within a research team 
are part and parcel of how an analytic research process proceeds. 
However, it is not quite so obvious that the interpretative and dis-
cursive moments are systematically applied and considered to be 
decisively important. But without any such communication about 
the rules of concept usage and without the search for a consensus on 
them, the aim of conceptual research, which is to clarify the mean-
ings of concepts, would be difficult to attain. There have been, in the 
history of psychoanalysis, a number of attempts to clarify concepts 
in discourse, like the concept study groups of mainly US-American 
analytic institutes, or the Panel-discussions on individual concepts, 
associated with the idea of overcoming contradictory or outdated 
meanings of our concepts and of making our concepts fit for new 
developments. And while consensus is the aim, at times we only 
succeed in highlighting the dissent more sharply.
Empirical phenomena do not describe and name themselves. 
The person,  the concept user, is always in the game, and thus the 

248  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
dependency of the concept’s meaning from whoever is using the 
concept, from his or her being embedded in historically grown and 
socially shared language games. By focusing on the discourse and 
on the concept users (clinicians or researchers) it becomes clear 
that the relationship between a concept and the pertaining empiri-
cal phenomena, that is, between language and the world, cannot 
be regarded as only a two-digit relation. Rather, this relationship 
must be seen as triangular, in accordance with semiotic and prag-
matic tradition: there is the concept, there are the phenomena to 
which the concept refers, and there is the person who uses the con-
cept in line with his or her understanding. Thus, the meanings of 
concepts are embedded in and interact with different human life 
forms. Adequate consideration of this will make one sensitive to the 
fact that concept use is contingent  (dependent also on the Z eitgeist  
and on mentalities), which, by the way, is not that uninteresting an 
aspect in our international psychoanalysis, given that we use our 
analytic concepts across different continents and cultures. Therefore, 
conceptual studies can—in order to take into account such cultural 
bindedness—additionally take on Freud’s cultural theory perspec-
tive, which, along with clinical and metapsychological theory, is the 
third classic pillar in the history of psychoanalytic theory.
So much for the intentions of conceptual research. Whichever 
way these intentions may be put into practice in the future, it can 
be noted that the sensitivity towards the described problem area 
has grown. To do research on concepts and their usage tends to be 
understood as quality assurance. As many of our concepts are also 
being employed outside of the analytic situation, it is all the more 
important to preserve the essential analytic  meaning aspects of our 
concepts.
But what does the analytic research field look like in which con-
ceptual research had to find its position?
Some thoughts on psychoanalysis, research, and science
What is understood by research in psychoanalysis?
Not only can our analytic concepts have different meanings for dif-
ferent users, but so can our methodological concepts. As we know, 
there is no uniform understanding of ‘research’ in psychoanalysis 

PLURALISM IN THEORY AND IN RESEARCH   249
today. At times it is understood as a loose metaphor, at other times 
as a methodologically sophisticated programme, and in any case 
there exist a host of activities under its label. If we refer this only to 
analytic psychotherapy  research, then, for instance, at one end of this 
vast field there is an understanding of research based exclusively on 
Freud’s work, and at the other end we have an understanding of 
research which orients itself on the ideas formulated by neopositivis-
tic empiricism, or on cognitivism, or lately, on the neurosciences. This 
opens up a particularly interesting methodological field of tension 
between, on the one hand, the ideographic view oriented on the indi-
vidual single case, and, on the other, the nomothetic view oriented 
on the taking of samples and on universal laws—two positions in the 
analytic research field which are usually relatively irreconcilable.
For some, psychoanalysis—according to classical analytical con-
viction—represents by its practice alone a special kind of research: 
we analysts research  unconscious processes of our patients, and at 
best, also our own; and we reflect on our cases and publish these 
reflections in often fascinating case studies. Generations of analysts 
have shared this self-image, which is expressed in Freud’s (1927: 
256) ‘conjunction between cure and research’. To call each analyst 
also a researcher, as this dictum demands, makes for a sometimes 
flattering self-image, but in a modern understanding of science, it 
can be seen as a rather problematic use of the term ‘research’. Not 
quite unjustly, this understanding of research is called somewhat 
naïve today, as it is based upon Freud’s 19th-century understand-
ing of science. The understanding of research and the criteria which 
scientific research would have to meet have of course changed since 
Freud’s times. Thus, critics usually point out a series of deficits in 
this so-called conjunction-research: along with the danger of merely 
selective or distorted—in Grünbaum’s (1988) words: ‘epistemically 
contaminated’—reporting from the analytic situation, one of the 
problems indicated is that such research is often only a one-person-
endeavour, that it produces not easily replicable and criticizable 
results, and that its findings cannot always be reconstructed due 
to insufficient information. The idea that a researcher, on his or her 
own, generates hypotheses, gathers and interprets the data, and thus 
structures the whole research process alone, is of course not easy to 
bring into agreement with the convictions arising out of research 
understandings oriented on the standards of intersubjectivity.

250  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
On the other hand, those modern understandings of research 
which are empiricism-orientated appear naïve and deficient to a con-
vinced conjunction-researcher. For one, because the research process 
is often far removed from the analytic situation, too far away from 
direct subjective experience; and then because unconscious proc-
esses, which can only be inferred via hermeneutic methods, are to 
be quantitatively grasped and measured; and because often the ana-
lyst him- or herself does not occupy a privileged role in the research 
process.
The more one goes beyond pure psychotherapy research and 
opens up the complete research field in psychoanalysis, then there 
is the conviction, and increasingly so, that psychoanalysis cannot 
shut itself off from modern ideas of research as they have developed 
in the 20th century in natural, human, and the social sciences. It has 
become more and more acknowledged that not only the genuine 
analytic path of research, but also that research practice generated 
by, for example, empiricism and cognitivism, but also and above all 
by the hermeneutic sciences, could be of interest for us. The rele-
vance of the analytic practice in the various research areas, however, 
remains unquestionable for most of us: the analytic situation with its 
emphasis on subjectivity, interaction, shared experience, and uncon-
scious processes remains the core, the important empirical basis, and 
also indispensable place of justification. This particularity undoubt-
edly sets the constraints  for the import of other research technologies 
into psychoanalysis.
To conclude this little excursion: there is a broad, multi-layered 
understanding of research within psychoanalysis (cf. also Leuzinger-
Bohleber et al., 2003a), and whenever research is discussed, the respec-
tive understanding of research—that is to say the epistemological 
perspective—is always present. It would therefore be desirable if the 
discussants were to acknowledge this and would more frequently 
explicate their own understanding of research. And this in turn is no 
doubt connected with the question of what they in fact consider ‘sci-
entific’. For, whoever speaks about research always refers—at least 
implicitly—to the sciences, as today it is the sciences which essen-
tially codify how research functions. If we analysts are not seeking 
splendid isolation (which we possibly cannot afford as long as ana-
lytic therapy as a scientifically  recognized procedure is paid for by 
national health insurers), we will at least have to engage with the 

PLURALISM IN THEORY AND IN RESEARCH   251
current discussions about criteria for research. Critically  engage—for 
of course psychoanalysis can assert its own way of thinking and its 
own view of the world ( Weltbild ) and can itself proffer suggestions, 
based on its own very specific model of the mind. To look over the 
fence can be beneficial—and at times both sides may learn from each 
other (an approach of this kind in psychotherapy research is certainly 
the multi-perspective. catamnestic study of the German Psychoana-
lytic Association, Leuzinger-Bohleber et al. , 2003b).
Is psychoanalysis regarded as a science?
It seems appropriate to elucidate briefly the relationship between 
psychoanalysis and the sciences—a varied history, occasionally 
interspersed with moments of acknowledgement, but more often 
with moments of devaluation. Psychoanalysis is and definitely has 
been treated with little affection by the established sciences. Often, 
it has not even been conceded ‘scientific’ status. Questions of sta-
tus, however, as everyone knows, are not trivial questions, as they 
determine public standing and admission to government (medical 
and social) institutions, or will determine university affiliation and 
research grants.
From our analytic position, the relationship with the established 
sciences is also an ambivalent one. Some of us even question whether 
psychoanalysis should seek any kind of proximity with other sci-
ences; whether it is not a science in its own right, autonomous in all 
essential features—with its own subject matter: the Unconscious, 
and then with its own specific research methods for understanding 
and interpreting this Unconscious. And there are still those among 
us who advise to generally keep a distance between us and other 
sciences. André Green (2005: 632), for instance, concisely postulated 
some time ago, in the debate with Robert Wallerstein about the com-
mon ground  in psychoanalysis: ‘Psychoanalysis in my view is nei-
ther a science nor a branch of hermeneutics. It is a practice based on 
clinical thinking  that leads to theoretical hypotheses.’ This statement, 
that psychoanalysis is a practice leading to theory, refers to Freud’s 
characterization of psychoanalysis as a method, a cure, and a theory. 
This is to say, that our work does not only deal with science or with 
the application of theoretical insights, but also with personal knowl-
edge and experience, with practical skills, with learned abilities, 

252  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
perhaps even artistic ones, with intuition, self-reflection, and also 
with ethical convictions.
In any case, ‘practice leads to theory’—and precisely that has 
always been claimed by psychoanalysis, namely that it is a practice 
and a theory, for instance a clinical or a developmental theory, and it 
has also claimed to have a model of the mind. But there is a problem 
here: regarding the understanding of what theories, models, or ‘the-
oretical hypotheses’ (Green) are, psychoanalysis certainly does not 
have an exclusive monopoly on definition. What hypotheses and 
theories are, which structures and which functions they have, how 
they are tested, how they change, how new theories arise, why some 
disappear—all of this is also discussed in the sciences, especially in 
epistemology.
All of this is itself subjected to change: the question of what is con-
sidered scientific, and thus what is correspondingly considered good 
research, the question of which theories, which methods are deemed 
the best, all of this is contingent. Each so-called turn in the last cen-
tury has generated new belief systems in this respect, the behaviour-
istic turn  as well as the linguistic turn , the cognitive turn , as well as 
the current neuro turn . And each turn has produced modifications in 
the view on phenomena that were considered relevant, and also in 
the evaluation of those research methods judged admissible. And of 
course these modifications in the scientific world views have always 
had an impact on psychoanalysis, too, and have coloured our under-
standing of science and research. Thus, in the course of its history, 
psychoanalysis has approached changing scientific positions and has 
attempted to adapt their respective methodological convictions for its 
own needs. We know the discussions that say that psychoanalysis—
if it is a science at all—is most likely a hermeneutic one, a science of 
understanding and interpretation. Or, that psychoanalysis—if it is a 
science—is most likely a neo-positivistic one, a science of explanation 
and prediction. Still others see psychoanalysis as being close to the 
cognitive sciences and their memory theories. Currently for some the 
biological or the neuro-sciences have become the leading science.
There is definitely a colourful discussion in psychoanalysis on 
the subjects of science and research! The conviction, which relation 
psychoanalysis has with the sciences, determines to a consider-
able extent what kind of research is regarded as most suitable, as 
important, right, and useful. But which science and which logic of 

PLURALISM IN THEORY AND IN RESEARCH   253
research offer at which time the best paradigm for psychoanalysis? 
This question is answered differently by different voices. Thus we 
not only find the described variety in theory, but also variety within 
the analytic research field . And this is a problem, of course. At first 
glance, there is nothing wrong with having different convictions; 
the question is only how respective protagonists deal with this. Will 
they listen to each other, will they try to understand the other’s posi-
tion, or will they only be interested in their own position? All of this 
will have consequences for a possible dialogue.
Conceptual research in the force field of two pluralisms
In psychoanalysis, we have over the course of time become familiar 
with discussions about the pluralism of our theories, perhaps even 
the pluralism in clinical practice. And by now the very term ‘plu-
ralism’ may set off a reaction of discomfort in some, as at times it 
appears only to gloss over the fact that the different analytic commu-
nities do not have so much to say to each other any more. On occa-
sion, convictions other than one’s own are devalued, and on other 
occasions the well-known attitude of ‘anything goes’ is taken.
Yet ‘pluralism’ does not need to have only negative connotations, 
but can also be understood as referring to a constructive diversity 
from which a competing, fair search for the best problem solutions 
can result. And in this sense I would see each research approach, like 
here conceptual research, in the force field of this diversity of convic-
tions, of which, so my thesis, there are two kinds:
1. There is the very familiar pluralism of psychoanalytic theories 
and schools, which I would like to call here—to keep things sim-
ple— theory-pluralism . Thus, for example, conceptual research at 
all times moves within the labyrinth of divergent theories, of the 
huge historically grown variety of analytic traditions, classified 
by geographic or cultural aspects, or often by the names of those 
authorities to which one feels particularly obligated qua analytic 
socialization.
2. But each research approach also finds itself confronted with 
another kind of pluralism; namely, the multitude of convictions 
as to which scientific maxims psychoanalytic research should 
adhere to. These beliefs are usually connected with a preference 

254  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
for a methodological position, or with a leading science which 
psychoanalysis should follow epistemologically. I will call 
this second  pluralism—again keeping things simple— research-
pluralism .
It would be useful, therefore, when discussing a research activity, 
to consider its relationship to these two pluralisms. Of course, this 
does not make things easier, as a consideration within the frame-
work of the one pluralism is already difficult enough. Green (2005: 
629) describes a regrettable consequence of theory-pluralism: ‘the 
Kleinians read only the Kleinians, just as the Lacanians cite only 
the Lacanians’. And we can observe similar tendencies in the field 
of research-pluralism. Empiricists tend to quote empiricists, just as 
conjunction researchers often only make reference to conjunction 
researchers. Everyone likes to be by themselves. Closed quoting 
circles may increase the rankings in the respective scientific com-
munity, but do not necessarily facilitate the earlier described ‘search 
for the best solution’—a pity when one is convinced of the necessity 
of constructive discourse, but obviously unavoidable; and perhaps 
only to be understood better if we used our own analytic tools.
With the example of conceptual research here I can only describe 
the questions and problems that arise in the field of tension that 
these two pluralisms create. I do not have definite answers. It would 
be a good start indeed, and very useful, if those awful devaluations 
were to stop: to call someone with a different analytic theoretical 
tradition non-analytic, or to from the outset label anyone who has 
another understanding of research as unscientific. But there has been 
one question that leads in a good direction: in the debate about the 
common ground  in psychoanalysis, Wallerstein (2005b: 636) directed 
a rhetorical question to Green: ‘Who decides when it is truly  psy-
choanalytic thought?’ I would like to paraphrase this question with 
regard to the research-pluralism and ask: ‘Who decides when it is 
truly scientific research in psychoanalysis?’
Theory-pluralism and research-pluralism—debates about 
the common ground
Two pluralisms—perhaps one can better answer the question of 
what truly  is research  in psychoanalysis, and what the status of 

PLURALISM IN THEORY AND IN RESEARCH   255
individual research programmes is, if one took a closer look at 
the difficulties, presented by the research-pluralism, against the 
background of the more familiar discussion about the theory-
pluralism. A prominent, more recent example, of this discussion is 
the earlier mentioned controversy between Green and Wallerstein 
about the common ground .
The Green–Wallerstein debate
Both protagonists enter this debate with clear statements. Wallerstein 
(2005a: 623) is optimistic; he is convinced of a common ground  which 
characterizes all analysts as adherents of a shared psychoanalytic 
discipline. Green (2005: 627), on the other hand, is sceptical: ‘Freud’s 
monopoly has ended’; he considers the common ground -idea merely 
‘a political act’  which, to his mind, is an unsuitable attempt to over-
come ‘geographical and ideological boundaries’ in an international 
analytic community. Both notice insufficient communication within 
psychoanalysis, and Wallerstein gives as an important reason for this 
a language barrier between Anglo-Saxon and French authors. As to 
pointing out language barriers, he is certainly correct. For some time, 
English has been the most relevant language in psychoanalysis. And 
whoever wants to be heard internationally from a Spanish, Italian, 
French, German, or other language background must publish in 
English and come to terms with the respective language barrier. But 
is what Wallerstein refers to here really only a language barrier, that is 
to say, only a problem of language competency and translation? Even 
within a language community things are not so uncomplicated and 
we must already grapple with more than the usual language barriers. 
This aspect has been beautifully illustrated by the British Rock poet 
Sting in his song ‘I’m an alien, I’m a legal alien, I’m an Englishman in 
New York.’
As Green notes, not only are we dealing with language barriers, 
but also, at all times, with geographical and ideological boundaries , 
and thus, as it were, with cultural barriers—historically grown 
differences, based on different mentalities and on differently 
developed understandings of psychoanalysis and also of science. 
Green (2005: 631), perhaps a little disappointed, complains about 
one possible consequence of these barriers when he describes the 
reception of French authors in Anglo-Saxon discussions: ‘French 

256  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
authors were considered … as smooth talkers of no interest’. 
I assume that Green alludes, amongst other things, to the beliefs 
of some empiristically oriented researchers for whom what counts 
is only ‘hard’ quantitative data, and everything else is nothing but 
‘soft’ talk.
In answer to the question of what true research is, I would like to 
pick out two aspects in this debate which appear fundamental to me.
The first has to do with the already mentioned question of sta-
tus: Is psychoanalysis a science  at all? For Green, as we have heard, 
psychoanalysis is neither a science nor a branch of hermeneutics. 
Wallerstein (2005b: 635) has a different belief; for him psychoa-
nalysis is an independent discipline, ‘rooted in the exploration 
of workings of unconscious mental processes, but with interfaces 
with … philosophy and linguistics at the one end of the spectrum, 
to cognitive psychology and modern neuroscience at the other 
end’. In this I agree with Wallerstein. For, renouncing the claim 
of being scientific is not only incompatible with our history, but 
would also hold the danger that psychoanalysis withdraws from 
all scientific discourses, and therefore from an essential part of our 
social reality—and, at worst, fragments into a loose assembly of 
fundamentalist, sect-like, associations. And, as already pointed 
out, our participation in government health systems would also 
be at stake …
The second aspect has to do with another status question. 
Because Green in this debate argues so decidedly against psychoa-
nalysis as a science, one cannot simply ask: What kind of science 
psychoanalysis is after all? But one has to ask: Where does one 
locate psychoanalysis epistemologically ? For Green (2005: 632), psy-
choanalysis forms the bridge between nature and culture. Waller-
stein sees this similarly, that psychoanalysis draws nourishment 
from both natural and cultural sources. But remarkably enough 
he then proceeds to exclude the cultural sources from his scien-
tific consideration. For him, science  can only study one aspect—
nature and natural sources (Wallerstein, 2005b: 637). Sciences, in 
the English-speaking world, are generally understood as natural  
sciences (such as biology, chemistry, and physics), the others (such 
as sociology, psychology, and philosophy) are humanities  or arts 
‘that do not rely on the scientific method’ (The American Herit-
age Dictionary, 2001: 48). Wallerstein’s view then does of course 

PLURALISM IN THEORY AND IN RESEARCH   257
have consequences for the kind of research methods he considers 
appropriate.
Psychoanalysis between ‘nature and culture’—what 
are the consequences?
It does make a big difference, whether—moving in the fields of 
epistemology and research—one sees oneself grounded only in the 
‘natural world’ , then one would argue more from a natural scientist’s 
point of view and therefore prefer their pertaining research methods 
(for example, experiments) and research aims (for example, causal 
explanations ); or whether one wants to take up the, what Green calls, 
‘bridging function’ between nature and culture. I would agree with 
Green’s view—with the reservation, however, that I see psychoa-
nalysis as a science. But then one cannot limit oneself to the lan-
guage games and research maxims of the natural sciences alone. 
One would have to critically evaluate how one could do justice to 
both sides, thus one would also have to include the language games 
and research methods of the social and cultural sciences, with the 
aim to understand  and to reconstruct meaning. In its choice of meth-
ods, conceptual research, by the way, oscillates between both classes 
of methods, which are not, after all, disjunctive.
Paying attention to this culture-side of the bridge means focus-
ing in a specific way on the human being as an individual, and thus 
also on analyst and patient as interacting subjects, each with their 
own subjectivity. It means keeping in mind that their experiences 
are woven into biographical, cultural, and historical contexts. In all 
this, our analytic language, that is to say, our theoretical language, 
including its concepts, has been, since Freud, a suitable medium for 
describing and reflecting the double interwoveness of the individual 
in nature and culture. By the way: when concepts and conceptual 
fields are investigated by conceptual research, then this double func-
tionality of analytic concepts—namely to grasp the biological nature 
of the individual, and, at the same time, his or her biographically 
grown individuality and subjectivity—is always one of the themes.
The summary of this short epistemological excursion: there is rea-
son enough to see psychoanalysis as a scientifically based endeav-
our—then one would be more in line with Wallerstein than with 
Green. And there are also enough reasons to take psychoanalysis 

258  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
seriously in its bridging function between nature and culture, which 
in turn is more in line with Green, and less with Wallerstein. What 
does such a belief (‘science between nature and culture’) mean for the 
question of true research? Who decides questions like these? Some 
would like an authority to decide, but this will not help those who do 
not believe in that authority. How could one come closer to a reason-
able answer? A further short detour may be useful to explore this.
Common ground and specific (pre-)understanding: An example
By now, I think it has become clear that a decisive role in taking a 
position on what is ‘true’ research is played by the personal belief 
systems which we have all developed. Of course, Wallerstein, Green, 
and all of us who participate in these debates on status and common 
ground  come from totally different scientific cultures, from specific 
grounds , so-to-speak. What it can mean to be socialized into a spe-
cific understanding of science, and thus eventually into a specific 
understanding of psychoanalysis already during one’s studies and 
further education, I would like to illustrate with an example: my 
own scientific socialization. I choose this in scientific contexts’ some-
what unusual form of a ‘case vignette’ (which definitely cannot be 
left out of any analytic paper), because I want to point out some of 
those pre-assumptions which often remain implicit and which char-
acterize my (any) understanding of research and my (any) specific 
ground . The attempt to explicate one’s own scientific world view 
may better elucidate how useful it can be in discussions about a com-
mon ground , also in psychoanalysis, to clarify one’s own perspective 
as far as possible—for oneself, but also for others. This might facili-
tate the recognition that, regarding scientific beliefs, a (continuously 
developing) specific ground  always comes into play.
In most countries, the path to becoming an analyst follows a two-
phase educational process. Many have academic degrees mostly 
in medicine, or psychology. As a psychologist, like many from my 
generation, I was influenced by the debates in the social sciences 
that took place in Germany in the 1970s, following the fundamental 
debates of the late 1960s. This may imply that up to now I value 
such research traditions which, in their images of man, see the 
individual as a cultural and historical being, not merely as a bio-
logical system. In my Central-European understanding, science, or 

PLURALISM IN THEORY AND IN RESEARCH   259
Wissenschaft , is (as I have discussed above) not only natural science. 
In Germany and in other countries of continental Europe, many dis-
ciplines are assigned equal status as sciences: natural sciences and 
equally the human, social, or cultural, or linguistic sciences—with 
their respective differing scientific  methods. Freud, by the way, in 
his idea of a psychoanalytic university, wanted to see gathered the 
whole canon of sciences, all the sciences of his time concerned with 
the human being.
And so, in the times of my studies in psychology, I grew—like 
others too—into a rather broad, in no way one-sided, understand-
ing of science. Beside this, empiricism in academic psychology was 
not yet so dominant; qualitative and interpretative methods for the 
exploration of the psyche were deemed as equally admissible as the 
quantitative-empirical methods. One did not have to experiment, or 
test statistical hypotheses, or build computer models, in order to be 
recognized as a scientist. From the start, it was conveyed to me that 
there are two basic entities in psychology: facts, which are mainly 
graspable with the methods of the natural sciences, and meanings , 
which are mainly graspable with the methods of linguistics and cul-
tural sciences. This is why I am convinced, to this day, that in psycho-
analysis and in psychoanalytic research we have to take into account 
the interplay  of both, facts and meanings. And for me, human beings 
are individuals who process meanings and generate meanings, and 
are actually not merely information-processing systems. I further 
learnt, through the ordinary language turn  (which does away with the 
strict separation between scientific and everyday language) that lan-
guage and its rules and structures, and its diverse use in science and 
practice can be the subject of independent scientific investigation—a 
useful approach indeed for a talking cure like psychoanalysis (and 
self-evident in conceptual research).
All in all, this conveyance of a multi-layered understanding of 
science has made me somewhat sceptical from then on towards 
authors who unfailingly believe that science only works in the way 
that they practise it, and in particular only with their methods. In 
some important aspects, I was thereafter epistemologically social-
ized by the Frankfurt school of philosophy with its central tenets 
orientated at the American pragmatism. ‘In important aspects’ 
means, for instance, their departure from a correspondence theory 
of truth and their preference for a consensus theory  of truth. What 

260  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
is temporarily true is that which a scientific community can agree 
on in an exchange of rational arguments, which of course includes 
empirical findings. And what is true is that which a scientific com-
munity deems useful and workable for the solution of the respective 
problems. There is not ‘the one unchangeable’, the ‘eternal’ truth. 
In science, there is always only the arduous road towards a ‘best 
problem solution’ in the context of a historical situation. Last but 
not least, I have also learnt the following through Popper and Kuhn: 
our own beliefs, even more so our own theories and hypotheses, 
may always need correction or may prove to be wrong. What is con-
sidered a secure base, secured knowledge, or state of the art, needs 
constant updating. Above all one must try to again and again com-
municate and look for consensus. Science may go wrong; nowadays 
it is only religion that still promises absolute certainty. In a science 
we are not only looking for evidence to support our hypotheses—
surely an important aspect. In a science we must also acknowledge 
the criticism of others; and we must definitely accept the relativity 
of the beliefs of our own scientific reference group. How science and 
research interact with social, political, and often, economic condi-
tions was of course also emphasized in the thinking of the Frankfurt 
school. Even scientists are just children of their time.
In my psychoanalytic  training in the 1980s, the pluralistic labels that 
are so familiar today did not initially play such a big role. This was 
most certainly due to the specific situation in Germany. For, of course, 
psychoanalysis and its institutions were suffering from the effects of 
National Socialism, which up to this day are a central theme in Ger-
man psychoanalysis. Mainly in the English-speaking analytic world 
decisive theoretical developments in theory and research had taken 
place after the Second World War. Not only we analysts in training 
tried first of all to reconnect with Freud’s ideas, and then only gradu-
ally with these new approaches. As a consequence, we read essentially 
Freud at that time, and then only gradually added in other kinds of 
analytic literature: in time the ego-psychologists and the object rela-
tion theorists; we did not think Kohut was so terrible; on the horizon, 
Kleinian approaches were emerging more and more; Lacan guided 
our attention to the importance of language … I only slowly got to 
know the subtle differences and the sometimes intimate animosities 
among the diverse competing analytic and scientific schools—which 
became more clear to me mainly during the systematic reading for 

PLURALISM IN THEORY AND IN RESEARCH   261
the revision of the book The Patient and the Analyst  (Sandler et al. , 
1992). Green (2005: 627) probably rightly referred to some ‘bloody 
duels’, to anger and bitterness in those debates about the ‘correct’, 
the ‘true’ common ground  in psychoanalysis.
What plays a lesser important role today—compared to the times 
of my analytic training—is certainly the broad and public dialogue 
of psychoanalysis with other sciences such as philosophy, ethnology, 
and also the literary sciences. We met with a lively interest which was 
in our theory but also in our interpretative method of understand-
ing unconscious aspects of the mind. One thing is indeed strange: 
on the one hand, interpretation ( Deutung ) is one of our main tools 
in psychoanalysis. And also in the evaluation  of empirical data, the 
interpretation of the results is an acknowledged and creative activ-
ity of a scientist. On the other hand, however, when today someone 
says in a research context that he or she is applying interpretative or 
hermeneutic methods to generate  data, this is often considered unsci-
entific, because supposedly such methods do not meet the criteria 
of objectivity. In my academic socialization, interpretative methods 
were always part of the admissible canon of methods, as a ‘rational 
reconstruction of meaning’, which of course must take into account 
the interplay of facts and meaning mentioned earlier.
Against the background of this specific scientific socialization, 
conceptual research later seemed of interest to me for three reasons:
 it attempts to integrate new knowledge, whether it comes from 
psychoanalysis or neighbouring disciplines;
 it remains grounded through its reference to the analytic situation 
and analytic practice—and has no reservations against the use of 
interpretative methods; and
 team work plays a decisive role in its projects, be that in the search 
for consensus, or for precision regarding dissent.
A research programme which had as its subject the investigation of 
change in the use of our concepts, and in doing so attempted to largely 
preserve the analytic substance of our concepts, and at the same time 
sought to integrate the view of different concept users, and always 
kept an eye on the validity and usefulness of our concepts for clinical 
practice—that was really something. Conceptual research—under-
stood in this sense—might contribute to sharpening the analytic 

262  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
profile of our concepts, and therefore eventually our theories, too. 
Thus the task would be, in the current dialogue with memory 
researchers, for example, to clarify the conceptual field surrounding 
our analytic concept ‘unconscious’, and one would have to work out 
the specific analytic connotation of ‘dynamic unconscious’—so that 
‘unconscious’ is not equated with ‘implicit’, as often happens.
Enough about my case. A ‘case vignette’, by nature, can only high-
light a few aspects at a time. Its purpose was only to illustrate from 
which specific ground  and with which scientific pre-knowledge one can 
enter the psychoanalytic research field. It should thus underline my 
argument that—with reference to both pluralisms—epistemological 
and methodological questions can hardly be dealt with in discourse 
successfully, if one does not pay attention to the specific and differ-
ent scientific backgrounds of the discussants.
A plea for connectionism
Theory-pluralism and research-pluralism—and what now? The 
answer to the question ‘Who decides when it is truly psychoanalytic 
thought or research?’ remains open. Whoever expresses convictions 
in the fields of psychoanalysis and epistemology does this neither 
from an extraterrestrial position, nor from a position of absolute 
truth, superior to others. Besides choosing resignedly the path of the 
often lamented postmodern arbitrariness, there are strictly speak-
ing only two other ways to escape this dilemma. One can claim that 
one’s own belief represents the truth, and then one would have a 
good answer to the question of ‘Who decides?’—at least for oneself. 
Or, one seeks a way of approaching and communicating with those 
that have a different view. Then things become definitely more com-
plicated. Not only are there different voices, beyond that they often 
appear to be working rather unconnectedly, at times more in rivalry 
than cooperation. (By the way, many years ago, there was also an 
ignoring coexistence—namely between researchers and clinicians—
that motivated Sandler to make a suggestion for the structure of the 
annual IPA Research Conference  in London: analytic researchers were 
to report on their work; clinically working analysts were to discuss 
this work from their perspective, with a view to its clinical relevance. 
The other sequence would of course have been conceivable, too: a cli-
nician presents a case, and an analytic researcher discusses this case 

PLURALISM IN THEORY AND IN RESEARCH   263
from his or her research perspective. And this could possibly even be 
a researcher from another discipline, whereby such interdisciplinary 
exchange of knowledge would not have to be a one-way-street.)
The functioning of ideas, which are directed towards a critical 
dialogue with reference to each other, is generally dependent on 
important requirements: on mutual interest and mutual acknowl-
edgement of the specific  scientific beliefs, on renouncing a claim of 
exclusiveness, and on reflecting the contingency of one’s own posi-
tion. To fulfil those requirements seems to be the more difficult part 
of the endeavour. The intended ‘domination free discourse’ may be 
seen as utopian, and perhaps it is. On the other hand, we know the 
power of dreams … And indeed, what we currently experience is 
very much a growing critical discourse in the international debate 
about our occasionally almost incompatible understandings of psy-
choanalysis. Why not think of a similar critical discourse in our 
research field? To listen to others and to respect them does not pre-
clude one from pursuing one's own interests, does it?
Maybe the idea of a common ground  has now generally become 
wishful thinking, really only an illusion (as Green calls it), especially 
the thought that this common ground  existed in a ‘general theory’ 
(which Wallerstein has in mind) and that through such a unifying 
theory the various international analytic cultures could be inte-
grated. But, if one cannot renounce the idea of a common ground , 
even if one wants to conjure it up again and again merely for politi-
cal reasons, why not simply refer to the origins of our science and 
take recourse to Freud’s work? For it is here that the large major-
ity of analysts seems to agree: historically  speaking Freud’s theory 
is definitely our common ground . And why not keep our eyes on this 
ground , the beginnings of our science, as reference basis? Interest-
ingly enough, people outside psychoanalysis have few problems 
seeing the unifying force of our analytic roots.
Freud, in his classic understanding of science and in his concern 
about the recognition and prestige of the young science, saw the basis 
of psychoanalysis in the agreement to central tenets. ‘The assump-
tion that there are unconscious mental processes, the recognition 
of the theory of resistance and repression, the appreciation of the 
importance of sexuality and of the Oedipus complex—these consti-
tute the principal subject-matter of psychoanalysis and the founda-
tions of its theory. No one who cannot accept them all should count 

264  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
himself a psychoanalyst’ (Freud, 1923a: 247). That is how simple it 
once was. At the same time Freud was scientist enough—in all his 
efforts to keep the analytic community in line—to emphasize that 
his statements were all subject to historic change as expressed, for 
instance, in his belief that the advance of knowledge does not tol-
erate any rigid definitions, up to his radical assumption that one 
day biology ‘will blow away the whole of our artificial structure of 
hypotheses’ (Freud, 1920: S. 60).
If one were to stop seeing a common ground  as a set of unchangeable  
theoretical beliefs or axioms—as the smallest common denominator 
of all analysts, so-to-speak—then, a totally different view might open 
up. Particularly Freud’s image of man, his epistemological interest, 
his analytic-exploring, critical-understanding, and reflecting look 
at the human psyche—at nature and culture—all this could be the 
model for us analysts up to today when wrestling with a continually 
changing common ground . Neither concepts, nor theories, nor epis-
temological beliefs, are static quantities, and I actually think that no 
common ground  should have the status of an eternally unchangeable 
creed; it, too, must be discussed and elaborated again and again. 
And of course in dialogue, however arduous this may be at times. 
As analysts we could easily understand how much the complexity 
of such a discourse about our analytic thinking and practice invites 
the avoidance of such arduous work, and we could analyse which 
function the illusion and the wish for uniformity have in all this.
Guided by a common view of man and by a common interest in knowl-
edge controversial discussions about a common ground  in both fields—the 
field of analytic theory and the field of epistemological approaches to 
the human mind—could lead to a more dynamic understanding of a 
common ground. The term ‘controversial discussion’ is intentionally 
chosen here in analogy to the British controversial discussions . These 
were discussions which, at the time, did not lead to a unified theory, 
but helped to precisely describe the dissent and to this day have led to 
a (relatively) tolerant cooperation. Such a path would surely be more 
modest than the working out of a general all-encompassing theory. 
But I think it is also more realistic and perhaps can even be libidinously 
cathected: the hope of a unifying theory would have to be replaced by 
the hope of a constructive discourse for a common ground .
In any case, I think we have to acknowledge both our existing plural-
isms worldwide and not ‘celebrate’ them (as Wallerstein [2005b] criti-
cally notes). Why not understand them as a sign of vitality? In science 

PLURALISM IN THEORY AND IN RESEARCH   265
diversity must, pluralism must, however, have contours; it must be 
clearly defined so that its positive aspects can come to fruition. And 
an attempt must always be made to show convergences within the 
variety. Constructive controversial discussions would make this pos-
sible, splitting would not, nor would indifference. Therefore, the 
maxim must be: from a pluralism of indifference to connectionism . This 
term, too, has been intentionally chosen, in analogy to its use in the 
neurosciences. There, connectionist models of the human brain can 
clearly show how it is possible that, despite the multitude of instances 
and functions, a holistic operation can be achieved. A systematic net-
working with reference to each other and a systematic accompanying 
epistemological reflection are indispensable for favourable condi-
tions of quality assurance in science and research.
If this path of controversy and connectionism is chosen, then 
someday it might also be much easier to answer the question ‘Who 
decides, when it is truly psychoanalytic thought and research?’ with 
a ‘We all decide—and from time to time our decision might look 
slightly different!’
Note
 1.  This text—translated in cooperation with Eva Ristl—is based on 
ideas developed in a paper for the IPA Research Conference in 
London in 2006: ‘In Celebration of the 105th Anniversary of Sig-
mund Freud’s Birth: The Current State of Psychoanalytic Research’ 
(Section: epistemology, conceptual research and psychoanalysis). 
A former version was published in German in Forum der Psycho-
analyse  2007 (23: 288–307): ‘ Pluralismus in Theorie und Forschung—
was nun ?’
Bibliography
Canestri, J. (2006). Psychoanalysis: From Practice to Theory.  Whurr Pub-
lishers Ltd.
Carroll, L.C. ([1872]1960, 1970). Through the Looking Glass.  Penguin 
Books.
Dreher, A.U. (2000). Foundations for Conceptual Research in Psychoanalysis.  
Madison CT: International Universities Press.
Dreher, A.U. (2005). ‘Conceptual research’. In: Person, E.S., Cooper, A.M. 
and Gabbard, G.O. (eds) Textbook of Psychoanalysis . Arlington, VA: 
American Psychiatric Publishing, Inc..

266  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
Freud, S. (1915). Instincts and their vicissitudes. In: SE 14. The Hogart 
Press and The Institute of Psa, London.
Freud, S. (1920). Beyond the pleasure principle. In: SE 18. The Hogart 
Press and The Institute of Psa, London.
Freud, S. (1923a). Two encyclopaedia articles (A) Psychoanalysis, (B) 
The libido theory. In: SE 18. The Hogart Press and The Institute of 
Psa, London.
Freud, S. (1927). Postscript to The Question of Lay Analysis.  In: SE 20. The 
Hogart Press and The Institute of Psa, London.
Green, A. (2005) ‘The illusion of common ground and mythical plural-
ism’. IJP, 86: 627–32.
Grünbaum, A. (1988). ‘Précis of The Foundations of Psychoanalysis: 
A Philosophical Critique’. In: Clark, P . and Wright, C. (eds). Mind, 
Psychoanalysis and Science . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
pp. 3–31.
Jacoby, R. (1983). The Repression of Psychoanalysis: Otto Fenichel and the 
Political Freudians . New York: Basic Books.
Kuhn, T.S. (1962). The Structure of Scientific Revolutions . Chicago: IL, 
University of Chicago Press.
Leuzinger-Bohleber, M., Dreher, A.U. and Canestri, J. (eds) (2003a). Plu-
ralism and Unity? Methods of Research in Psychoanalysis . London: Inter-
national Psychoanalysis Library.
Leuzinger-Bohleber, M., Stuhr, U., Rüger, B. and Beutel, M. (2003b). 
‘How to study the quality of psychoanalytic treatments and their 
long-term effects on patient’s well-being: a representative, multiper-
spective follow-up study’. Int J Psychoanal ., 84: 263–290.
Parin, P . and Parin-Matthèy, G. (1986). Medicozentrismu s. In: Subjekt im 
Widerspruch. Syndikat. Frankfurt am Main: 61-80.
Sandler, J., Dreher, A.U., Drews, S., et al.  (1987). Psychisches Trauma: Ein 
Konzept im Theorie-Praxis-Zusammenhang. Materialien aus dem 
Sigmund-Freud-Institut Frankfurt am Main: 5.
Sandler, J., Dare, C. and Holder, A. (1992). The Patient and the Analyst: The 
Basis of the Psychoanalytic Process . 2nd edn. Revised and expanded by 
Sandler, J. and Dreher, A. U. London: Karnac.
Sandler, J. (1998). Sandler A.M.: Internal Objects Revisited.  London: 
Karnac.
The American Heritage Dictionary (2001). 4th edn. NY: Random 
House.
Wallerstein, R.S. (2005a). ‘Will psychoanalytic pluralism be an enduring 
state of our discipline?’ IJP, 86: 623–626.
Wallerstein, R.S. (2005b). ‘Dialogue or illusion? How do we go from 
here? Response to André Green’. IJP, 86: 633–638.

267CHAPTER TEN
New orleans congress panel: 
What does conceptual research 
have to offer?
Jorge L. Ahumada and Roberto Doria-Medina
To the question, ‘What does conceptual research have to offer?’ 
the short answer is: everything. Shorn of it, psychoanalysis 
dissolves as a discipline. However, it speaks of its intrica-
cies that we write this paper as a dialogue, to keep to our distinct 
stances.
J.L.A.: Freud was immersed in a lifelong conceptual struggle with 
what emerged from his clinical findings. Empirical work—gathering 
the relevant evidences—and conceptual work go hand in hand, this 
being valid for each and every observational discipline. Thus, the 
Galapagos Islands as a natural experiment lent Darwin the eviden-
tial path to his theory of the evolution of species, providing him the 
exemplars needed for accessing what went on, and to do so from 
multiple perspectives. When they expound on what the scientific 
method purportedly is, philosophers of science studiously skip such 
prime exemplars of knowledge buildup coming from the observa-
tional sciences.
R.D-M.: The distinction between conceptual and empiri-
cal research is indeed schematic and an oversimplification. So we 
should also ask: ‘What does empirical research have to offer?’ and 
then, vitally: ‘To whom?’

268  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
Among philosophers of science and on the philosophy of science 
several perspectives have to be considered. Are we talking about 
methodologists who speak after discoveries have been done and 
then intend to tell what good science is? Do we take into account 
epistemologists and their epistemologies? How do we differentiate 
the epistemic from the logical aspects of inquiry? How do we deal 
with historic and sociological considerations on the actual practice 
of research?
The crucial issue of evidence includes modes of evidence 
(Gil, 1993, 1998, 2000), domains of evidence for various disciplines, 
the relations between evidence, truth and proof, and so forth. The 
central theme for us psychoanalysts being psychoanalytic research.
J.L.A.: Scientific concepts, and notably our psychoanalytic ones, 
are ‘ open concepts’  (Pap, 1958: 312ff.; emphasis in original), modi-
fied and redefined in their different contexts of use. As Reichenbach 
(1947: 22) put it, empirical ‘definitions in use’ must define and 
redefine their elements in terms of concrete observational ones. Far 
from Cartesian univocities and deducticisms, objectivity is context-
dependent also in the exact sciences. To say that objectivity means 
to be observer-independent leads nowhere: how would we get to 
knowledge in case we were not human observers is plain nonsense. 
While all knowledge is in this sense irreducibly subjective, objec-
tivity results in ample fields of science from informal verification. 
Only in the ‘ideal’ or ‘formal’ sciences which have no empirical 
reference, and in the ‘exact’ sciences which mimic them in their for-
mal hypothetico-deducticist structure dealing with the inert and 
unthinking by way of reduction , verification uses formal theories. 
This was well-known to Pascal but a Popper or a Grünbaum care-
fully omit it.
R.D-M.: Science is much easier when it is more formalized because 
formalization transforms irreducible conceptual difficulties in tran-
sitory technical difficulties that can be overcome by means of dedi-
cated apprenticeship (Levy-Leblond, 1996). In that sense the strength 
and the weakness of the so-called exact sciences lies in that they let 
us avoid thinking continually and they develop through mechaniza-
tion. Mathematics, the foremost example of formalized science, is a 
purely algorithmic and syntactic activity in which signs do not have 
any determined meaning; its source is simply convention, it devel-
ops through deductive instruments building new demonstrations 

NEW ORLEANS CONGRESS PANEL   269
and inventing new axiomatic systems which eventually might 
produce potential instruments to obtain knowledge from the real 
(Klimovsky, 2000). Algorithms and axiomatic systems are way afar 
of the nature of psychoanalysis. Psychoanalytic practice is a practice of 
research, ultracomplex research I would dare say, initiated by a genius who 
was one of the most skilled and trained scientists of his time and who had 
the ability to deal creatively with the vanguard of scientific knowledge of his 
age. Our psychoanalytic findings are always contrasted from the consulting 
room to our culture and with other sciences, they circulate and reverber-
ate in different composites of knowledge and according to different parcell-
ings of reality, not free of the tensions generated by the oldest philosophical 
controversies that today can be reproduced in terms of nominalism versus 
constructivism in the current war of sciences  (see Hacking, 1999).
I propose a fourfold categorization of research and psychoa-
nalysis. In each fold there is no empirical/conceptual distinction, 
each one includes different modalities of research pertinent to psy-
choanalysis. The first comprises clinical, extraclinical, and experimental 
research. The second includes systematic (with gradients of formalization) 
and descriptive research: both, systematic and descriptive, can deal with 
single case studies or collective gathering of samples. The third delineates 
the possibilities of research from the inside of psychoanalysis, from the out-
side, during psychoanalysis and after. The fourth includes research about 
psychoanalysis, research from psychoanalysis on, and research in, psychoa-
nalysis.  Research programmes carve the realm of psychoanalysis dif-
ferently (see, for instance, Brakel 2000; Sandell et al. , 2000; J. Amer. 
Psychoanal. Ass.  Special volume on Varieties of Research, 2002).
J.L.A.: It must be stressed that empirical certainty is a myth.  Thus 
Charles Peirce, who was both a mathematical genius and a field 
worker in geodetics, held over a century ago that the idea of empiri-
cal certainty was irresistibly comical. Similarly, in what Landsberg 
(2000: 706) calls Einstein’s uncertainty principle, he had sustained 
in 1924 that ‘insofar as the propositions of geometry apply to reality, 
they are not certain; insofar as they are certain, they do not apply to 
reality’.
Peirce avows that we have only two types of thinking, mechani-
cal (formal) and anthropomorphic, which divides the so-called exact 
sciences and the observational sciences. The Established Truth of the 
Pythagorean-Cartesian-Popperian tradition is that a mathematically 
posited formal theory is a must for objectivity, for verification, and 

270  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
for science to be such: this functions, says Toulmin (1990: 149), as 
long as one restricts the field of study to the inert, inanimate, and 
unthinking. Strict predictibility depends on reducing processes to 
‘well-behaved’, that is, mechanical-like, variables.
In the observational sciences the complexities and often the 
contradictoriness of their objects of study allows scant reliance on 
formalization. Here attempts at ‘theory’ often usurp the place of 
enquiry: then an ordo exponendi , a didactical order of exposition, 
substitutes for the ordo inveniendi , the discernment of the incoming 
events.
R.D-M.: How are we to determine the moment of truth between 
subject and observer, the analyst being both at the same time?: this 
problem is not an exclusive prerogative of psychoanalysis (see 
Devereux, 1967). Psychoanalysis has also domain specificity, in the 
sense that concepts are not all the same and the structure of knowl-
edge differs according to the areas of content that require particular 
capabilities and expertise that are developed by the actual use of 
persistent cognitive subsystems (see Hirschfeld and Gelman, 1994). 
Psychoanalytic exploration is a formidable endeavour of discovery 
and its chronicles can be pondered by all those interested in the find-
ings of new lands and who might be ready for participating in the 
adventure. Every NASA expedition provides huge amounts of data 
for scientific scrutiny, empirical and conceptual, of course. In any 
case the practical aspects of getting into outer space provoke con-
ceptual treatment of what is going on and defy established concepts 
about cosmological matters with collateral gains for all sciences. 
Although technology is grossly present in the illustration it serves 
to underline that methodologists are not necessarily good astro-
nauts and nor do they necessarily contribute in developing the new 
fields of astrophysics. It is not through questionnaires, hundreds of 
questions before, during, and after the expedition, questions that 
include ethnicity and flying experience from playing with kites and 
being a passenger in commercial airlines to piloting Jumbo jets or 
STEALTH bombers, that the cosmos will unveil the incommensu-
rate multiplicity of reality (in this reference see Vaughan et al., 2000). 
We are in need of smart methods rather than rigorous ones so that 
robust correlations (Wimsatt, 1994) are obtained and relevant clues 
are separated from rubbish data. As Freud (1912: 114; italics Freud’s) 
noted ‘exact reports of analytic case studies are of less value than 

NEW ORLEANS CONGRESS PANEL   271
might be expected. Strictly speaking, they only possess the ostensible  
exactness of … ‘modern’ psychiatry … [Those] unwilling to take 
analysis and the analyst seriously, will pay no attention to accu-
rate verbatim records of the treatment either. This is not the way, 
it seems, to remedy the lack of convincing evidence to be found in 
psychoanalytic reports’. Psychoanalytic research is neither a tour for 
sophisticated tourists in need of an expert guide, nor a surveyor’s 
task with the appropriate surveyor’s level, as it is not a specula-
tive exercise in current theories. The psychoanalytic encounter is a 
complex expedition that involves a plurality of cognitive resources, 
intricate emotional logistics, and multiple levels of communication. 
In Freud’s (1913: 123) words: ‘The extraordinary diversity of the psy-
chical constellations concerned, the plasticity of all mental processes 
and the wealth of determining factors oppose any mechanization of 
the technique’.
J.L.A.: As I understand it, our clinical situation puts to work a 
logica utens , which signs Freud’s conception of method and theory 
building as explained in ‘The Resistances to Psychoanalysis’ (1925a: 
214–16) and in ‘An Outline of Psycho-analysis’ (1940: 161). The New 
Introductory Conferences in 1933 further detail that ‘ Progress in sci-
entific work is just as it is in an analysis . We bring expectations with us 
into the work, but they must be forcibly held back. By observation, 
now at one point and now at another, we come upon something 
new; but to begin with the pieces do not fit together. We put for-
ward conjectures, we construct hypothesis, which we withdraw if 
they are not confirmed, we need much patience and readiness for 
any eventuality, we renounce early convictions so as not to be led by 
them into overlooking unexpected factors, and in the end our whole 
expenditure of effort is rewarded, we get an insight into a whole sec-
tion of mental events, we have completed our task and now we are 
free for the next one’ (p. 174; emphasis added). The Autobiographi-
cal Study  expounds that scientific concepts are open ones: ‘Zoology 
and botany did not start from correct and adequate definitions of an 
animal and a plant … Physics itself, indeed, would not have made 
any advance if it had to wait until its concepts of matter, force, gravi-
tation, and so on, had reached the desirable degree of clarity and 
precision. The basic ideas or most general concepts in any of the dis-
ciplines of science are always left indeterminate at first and are only 
explained to begin with by reference to the realm of phenomena 

272  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
from which they are derived; it is only by means of a progressive 
analysis of the material of observation that they can be made clear 
and can find a significant and consistent meaning … a science based 
on observation has no alternative but to work out its findings piece-
meal and to solve its problems step by step’ (1925b: 58).
For Peircean fallibilism which takes experience as its start, indica-
tion (pointing, ostension, deixis) is as indispensable as it is irreduc-
ible (Sebeok, 1995: 224). Inquiry and treatment coincide, says Freud, 
in the unfolding of the clinical material. The psychical sciences, 
Peirce noted, present arduous problems of inference the resolution 
of which—he sustains, as Freud later did—must come out indexi-
cally or ostensively from observations in particular instances. Our 
concepts, holds Thomas Kuhn (1974), do not cluster in discrete sets 
with appreciable distances between them: set in Venn diagrams they 
cluster as overlapping classes with no precise limits. Small wonder 
then that for our different ‘schools’ terms such as ‚narcissism’ have 
widely different contents.
Going now into the polemic on what the terms ‘research’ and 
‘empiry’ apply to, we can all agree on that the kernel of our con-
cepts, fuzzy as they are, has come from psychoanalytic clinical 
work. So when it is stated that attempts to restrictively redefine 
what research has set in motion ‘anxieties about status, territory, 
exclusion’ (Target, 2002: 714), the issue is whether such anxieties 
are legitimate or not. When the term ‘empirical’ risks being sec-
torially appropriated, which despoils the hard-won empiricity of 
psychoanalytic clinical work, such anxieties are to my mind fully 
justified. Samely for the injunction ‘that we do not repeat the mis-
take of inventing our own research methodology which is neither 
accepted nor understood by neighbouring disciplines’ (Target, 2002: 
715). Sorry to say it, we clinical analysts have been long devising 
and improving our own research methodology, the psychoanalytic 
method, and it would be preposterous to ask that we surrender it 
in favour of what neighbouring disciplines might manage to grasp. 
The request that we graciously relinquish the empiricity of our clini-
cal method to an assumedly superior variables-defined ‘empiry’ 
mimicking reductive ideas of science I find divisive and bound to 
raise legitimate opposition.
Whatever space is gained by what I prefer to call ‘programmed 
research’ or ‘nomological research’ must come from an appraisal 

NEW ORLEANS CONGRESS PANEL   273
of its results, not from bids at epistemic superiority. And, 
while valuable work must be done in conceptual research, we 
should take heed of Freud's (1918: 48) warning that ‘No sooner has 
one begun to depart from the material on which one ought to be 
relying, than one runs the risk of becoming intoxicated with one's 
own assertions and, in the end, of supporting opinions which any 
observation would have contradicted’, this being why, he holds, as a 
rule purely theoretical controversy is unfruitful.
In order to gain a fruitful place, conceptual research must not 
tie itself to the chariot of programmed research. Whatever their 
virtues, experimental approaches on the basis of reduction to vari-
ables are bound to introduce a bias, as Gregory Bateson (1973) has 
shown for the case of Pavlovian psychology. Induction is an infer-
ence to the best available explanation , this being why instead of speak-
ing of a hypothetico-deductive method we might better speak of a 
hypothetico-inferential method . Importantly, up to what point the com-
plexities and contradictoriness of the analytic process can be use-
fully reduced to variables remains to be seen.
Our conceptual research should not aspire to function as a theo-
retical superscience imposing itself on the context of open discussion 
which is the hallmark of our discipline. To put it in Orwellian terms, 
about the very last thing we need is a Ministry of Truth intoxicating 
itself, and all of us, with its own assertions.
R.D-M.: We need to be much aware of the perils of worshiping 
Idealized Science, at the same time that we acknowledge that there 
is bad science, necessary anyway for many researchers to make a 
living. Psychoanalysis is just part of the whole scientific endeav-
our. Those who believe that there are more mature methods than 
the psychoanalytic method can do better in related fields and con-
tribute from there. Psychoanalysis may benefit from many areas of 
research, from new developments in non-classical logic, for exam-
ple, in particular paraconsistent logic (Asenjo, 1986; Da Costa and 
Lewin, 1995; Priest, 2001; Palau, 2002), from the transdisciplinary 
efforts of the sciences of discourse and the history of ideas (Van Dijk, 
1997; Tasic, 2001), from the multiple debates in the philosophy of 
mind, from the pertinent contributions of the neurosciences, and 
from the multiple methodologies in the field of historical studies 
(Burke, 1991, 1997), or the contrasting viewpoints of anthropol-
ogy (Kuper, 1999), just to name a few. As a passing remark lets 

274  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
consider the rudimentary quality of the protocols of most medical 
research in recent years, so far away from the complex nature of 
things and the candent topics of scientific debate. In fact the reor-
ganization of knowledge goes far back from its production (Lévy-
Leblond, 1996).
In the field of validation conceptual research is a must. If a 
pragmatic theory of meaning is considered (Habermas, 1999), the 
key concept is not truth but the generalized concept of validity, 
used epistemically in the sense of ‘rational acceptability’. Simi-
larly when considering the history of a concept or the structure 
of a concept we should acknowledge that the understanding of a 
linguistic expression means knowing how that expression can be 
used to get some understanding with someone about something 
in the world. What role we are going to attribute to mentalism, 
and how we are going to relate towards pragmatism or pragmati-
cism (Appel, 1967, 1987) are questions of enormous import when 
deciding on matters of validation. Are epistemological considera-
tions outmoded? The problem of justification acquires very dif-
ferent perspectives if realism is adopted or rather contextualism 
is opted for, if there is a deflationist consideration about truth or 
an epistemic approach that expands justification towards truth as 
the limit of it (Habermas, 1999). Empirical research cannot stand 
for ignorance of conceptual difficulties or in place of indispensable 
conceptual clarifications.
J.L.A.: Inference on our clinical facts is highly complex—an 
issue Charles Peirce was well aware of, as was Freud. This, and 
that counterinduction has a privileged place in accessing those 
facts (Ahumada, 1994, 1997), map the inbuilt limits of programmed 
research. Which helps grasp that, as adroitly held by Shedler (2002), 
speaking from such research, its reductions cannot attain the sharp-
ness of the objectivations gained in the detailed lived revision of 
examples in the analytic process. To put it mildly, the issues that 
the multi-levelled and paradoxical nature of the access to insight 
confront us with are not compliant enough for the methods of pro-
grammed research. Its efforts might likely be better focused on issues 
more suited to its methods.
Given that the objectivity gained in the clinical process goes 
further than whatever objectivity our concepts may attain, our con-
ceptual research must fall back once and again, as Freud urged, on 

NEW ORLEANS CONGRESS PANEL   275
clinical observation. Our ‘open concepts’ are at the opposite pole 
from formal ones, so our conceptualizations must be enquired on 
both clinically and historically, and they cannot be put to work by 
themselves.
R.D-M.: Clinical, historical, and theoretical lines of enquiry 
intertwine in an tangled conceptual matrix. Just picking the histori-
cal approach implies dealing with numerous epistemological and 
methodological problems pertaining to the varieties of historical 
investigation (see Burke, 1991, 1997).
Demonstrations by proof and by evidence must be set apart. 
Evidence dispenses of proof (Gil, 1993). Evidence has no need of 
recurring to dispositives of external assessment: it is patent by itself 
and for everybody. Although the relation between evidence and 
intuition is in debate since scholastic times with the antagonism 
posed by Scotus and Occam, two modes of intuition of evidence 
are to be distinguished (Gil, 1998): evidence that imposes itself 
more perceptually, and evidence of a logical import, more signalled 
by language. These two modes have to be related to the epistemic 
factors of conviction and certitude (Gil, 2000), whose unconscious 
determinants have not been fully explored.
J.L.A.: What about the sweet, fashionable enticements of scientific 
reductionism? Freud (1930) masterly held that modern man seeks 
to become a prosthetic god. Technologies are built on mechanical 
and reductionistic understandings, and our serfdom to the pleas-
ure principle yearns for theories and technologies permitting us to 
skip the efforts and pains of psychic evolution. Under the aegis of 
the Techno-Pleasure Principle, Brain replaces Mind: replacement 
of the paradigm of ‘psyche’ is by that of ‘brain’ in the currently 
ruling techno-sciences goes right across what we psychoanalysts 
have been striving for in the last century. The substitution of Mind 
by Brain as part of an all-around, prosthetic Techno-Mimesis runs 
against what André Green (1993: 1,032) voiced, that ‘psychoanaly-
sis [is] the effort to stay lucid’. The insights for emotional growth 
are hardy, they must be personally gained, and they can’t be mass-
produced.
R.D-M.: Scientific reductionism includes the simplistic, although 
multi-axial, taxonomies advocated by the crudest research-
ers who in the name of a neo-Kraeppelinian approach pretend 
to categorize patients by means of lists of disorders supposedly 

276  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
free of conceptual bias. Disorders that are nominated without 
psychopathological considerations and without a meaningful 
semiology, gathered under the ideological umbrella of pharma-
cology and the brain, as if the mythology of the brain had not 
passed away in the XIX century, and with the pretense that science 
deals only with the quantitative or numerical treatment of vari-
ables of observation. The necessary imprecision of psychoanalytic 
nosography, as Baranger (1992) put it, is part of the richness of 
psychoanalysis.
What does psychoanalytic research have to offer? More psycho-
analysis for all types of researches. More serious controversies for 
psychoanalysts (Bernardi, 2002). More psychoanalysis on psycho-
analytic method, psychoanalytic writings, and psychoanalytic theo-
ries (Gubrich-Simitis, 2000; Doria-Medina, 1991, 1997; Doria-Medina 
and Kijak, 1990). We should apply and extend psychoanalysis to our 
own psychoanalytic production as we can extend our psychoana-
lytic method to other fields.
Bernardi (2002) very aptly noted that there is an absence of sys-
tematic confrontation between psychoanalytic approaches, and 
the obstacles to the progress in argumentation, the reduction of 
the field of discussion, require epistemologic analysis plus psy-
choanalytic understanding of the unconscious factors that hamper 
true dialogue and fruitful debate. As he stated: the purely phil-
osophical debate has to be separated from the consequences for 
psychoanalytic practice of particular philosophical ideas, critical 
reflexion on theoretical concepts has to be coupled with clinical 
and extraclinical research, and self-analysis or re-analysis have to 
ascertain the personal limitations to get involved in open inter-
change under common laws for the mutual benefit that arises 
from confrontation due to reformulation of the premises that gov-
ern established knowledge.
It is time to follow Perelman (1977) and develop our own partic-
ular applications of the new rhetoric to psychoanalytic argumenta-
tion. Once we procure evidences, we have to discuss them if they 
are debatable and it is necessary to establish a specialized methodol-
ogy of argumentation, psychoanalysis being a discipline of a distinct 
genre.
As Bion (1976) puts it, we analysts see things that the rest of the 
world cannot see and there is a world in which it is impossible to 

NEW ORLEANS CONGRESS PANEL   277
see what an analyst sees. Our research is the way we strive to bring 
psychoanalysis beyond the psychoanalytical world if the existence 
of such a world is plausible enough.
Bibliography
Ahumada, J.L. (1994). ‘What is a clinical fact? Clinical psychoanaly-
sis as inductive method’. In: The Logics of the Mind. A Clinical View.  
London: Karnac. pp. 15–36.
Ahumada, J.L. (1997). ‘Counterinduction in psychoanalytic practice. 
Epistemic and technical aspects’. In: Ahumada J.L. et al.  (eds) The 
Perverse Transference and other Matters: Essays in Honor of R. Horacio 
Etchegoyen . Northvale NJ: Aronson, pp. 181–202.
Appel, K.-O. (1967). ‘Charles S. Peirce: From pragmatism to pragmati-
cism’. New Jersey: Humanities Press.
Appel, K.-O. (1987). Teoría de la verdad y ética del discurso.  Barcelona: 
Paidós.
Asenjo, F.G. (1986). ‘La verdad, la antinomicidad y los procesos men-
tales’. Revista latinoamericana de filosofía, Vol VIII, N° 1.
Baranger, W. (1992). ‘De la necesaria imprecisión en la nosografía psico-
analítica’. Rev de Psicoanál., N° especial 1 : 83–97.
Bateson, G. (1973). Steps to an Ecology of Mind . Herts., Paladin.
Bernardi, R. (2002). ‘The need for true controversies in psychoanalysis’. 
Int. J. Psychoanal.,  83: 851–73.
Bion, W. R. (2000[1976]). ‘Evidence’. In Bion, F. (ed.) Clinical Seminars and 
Other Works . London: Karnac. pp. 312–20.
Brakel, L.A.W. (2000). ‘The primary process and the unconscious: exper-
imental evidence supporting two psychoanalytic presuppositions’. 
Int. J. Psychoanal.,  81: 553–69.
Burke, P . (1991). New Perspectives on Historical Writing.  London: Polity 
Press.
Burke, P . (1997). Varieties of Cultural History. Madrid: Alianza.
Da Costa, N. and Lewin, R. (1995). ‘Lógica Paraconsistente’. Enciclopedia 
Ibero Americana de Filosofía.Vol VII.  Barcelona: Trotta. pp. 185–204.
Devereux, G. (1967). From Anxiety to Method in the Behavioural Sciences . 
Moutton.
Doria-Medina, R. (1991). ‘On Freud and monotheism’. Int. Rev. Psycho-
anal.,  18: 489–500.
Doria-Medina, R. (1997). ‘Notes on Psychoanalysis, Freudian Studies 
and Psychic Reality’. In: Ahumada J.L. et al.  (eds) The Perverse Trans-
ference and Other Matters . Northvale NJ: Aronson. pp. 422–432.

278  EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND ITS DISTURBANCES
Doria-Medina, R. and Kijak, M. (1990). ‘Investigación psicoanalítica 
sobre “El Moisés de Miguel Angel”’. Rev. de Psicoanálisis,  47: 478–85.
Freud, S. (1912). ‘Recommendations to physicians practising psycho-
analysis’. S.E. 12.
Freud, S. (1913). ‘On beginning the tratment’. S.E. 12.
Freud, S. (1918). ‘From the history of an infantile neurosis’. S.E. 17.
Freud, S. (1925a). ‘The resistances to psycho-analysis’. S.E. 20.
Freud, S. (1925b) ‘An autobiographical study’. S.E. 20.
Freud, S. (1930). ‘Civilization and its discontents’. S.E. 21.
Freud, S. (1933). ‘New introductory conferences on psycho-analysis’. 
S.E. 22.
Freud, S. (1940). ‘An outline of psycho-analysis’. S.E. 23.
Gil, F. (1993). Traité de L’évidence . Grenoble, J. Millon.
Gil, F. (1998). Modos da Evidencia.  Lisboa: Imprensa Nacional.
Gil, F. (2000). La Conviction . Paris: Flammarion.
Green, A. (1993). ‘Culture(s) et civilization(s), malaise ou maladie?’ 
Revue française de psychoanalyse,  57: 1,029–56.
Gubrich-Simitis, I. (2000). ‘Metamorphoses of “The Interpretation of 
Dreams”: Freud’s conflicted relations with his book of the century’. 
Int. J. Psychoanal. , 81: 1,155–83.
Habermas, J. (1999). Verdad y justificación , Madrid: Trotta.
Hacking, I. (1999). The Social Construction of What?  Boston MA: Harvard 
Univ. Press.
Hirschfeld, L.A. and Gelman, S.A. (1994). Mapping the Mind: Domain 
Specificity in Cognition and Culture.  Cambridge Univ. Press.
J. Am. Psychoanal. Ass. (2002). Varieties of Research, Special Volume.
Klimovsky, G. (2000). Las ciencias formales y el método axiomático . Buenos 
Aires, A-Z.
Kuhn, T. (1974). ‘Second thoughts on paradigms’. In: The Essential Ten-
sion: Selected Studies in Scientific Tradition and Change . Chicago: Univ. 
of Chicago Press. pp. 293–319.
Kuper, A. (1999). Culture: The Anthropologists’ Account.  Boston MA: 
Harvard Univ. Press.
Landsberg, P .T. (2000). ‘An uncertainty principle for geometry’. 
Nature , 404: 705–6.
Lévy-Leblond, J.-M. (1996). Aux contraires: Le exercise de la pensée et la 
pratique de la science.  Paris: Gallimard.
Palau, G. (2002). Introducción Filosófica a las Lógicas no Clásicas.  Barcelona: 
Gedisa.
Pap, A. (1958). Semantics and Necessary Truth . New Haven: Yale Univ. 
Press.

NEW ORLEANS CONGRESS PANEL   279
Perelman, C. (1977). L’Empire Rhétorique: Rhétorique et Argumentation.  
Paris: Vrin.
Priest, G. (2001). An Introduction to Non-Classical Logic.  Cambridge U. 
Press.
Reichenbach, H. (1947). Elements of Symbolic Logic . New York: 
Macmillan.
Sandell, R. et al.  (2000). ‘Varieties of long-term outcome among patients 
in psychoanalysis and long-term psychoanalytic psychotherapy: 
a recent review of findings in the Stockholm outcome of psychoa-
nalysis and psychotherapy project (STOPPP)’. Int. J. Psychoanal. , 
81: 921–42.
Sebeok, T.A. (1995). ‘Indexicality’. In: Ketner, K.L. (ed.) Peirce and Con-
temporary Thought . NY: Fordham Univ. Press. pp. 222–42.
Shedler, J. (2002). ‘A new language for psychoanalytic diagnosis’. J. Amer. 
Psychoanal. Ass.  50: 429–56.
Target, M. (2002). ‘Book review of Foundations of Conceptual Research 
in Psycho-analysis by Anna Ursula Dreher’. Int. J. Psychoanal ., 83: 
712–16.
Tasic, V . (2001). Mathematics in the Roots of Postmodern Thought . Oxford: 
Oxford Univ. Press.
Toulmin, S. (1990). Cosmopolis: The Hidden Agenda of Modernity.  Chicago: 
Univ. of Chicago Press.
Van Dijk, T.A. (1997). Discourse as structure and process. Discourse studies: 
A Multidisciplinary Introduction, Vols 1–2.  London: Sage.
Vaughan, S. C. et al. (2000). ‘Can we do psychoanalytic outcome research? 
A feasibility study’. Int. J. Psychoanal. , 84: 513–27.
Wimsatt, W. (1994). ‘The ontology of complex systems: levels of organi-
zation, perspectives and causal thickets’. In: M. Matthen and R.X. 
Ware (eds) Biology and Society: Reflections on Methodology, Canadian 
Journal of Philosophy, Suppl. to Vol. 20.



281INDEX
Academic achievements 13
Adaptability 100
Adult
personality 89
schizophrenic patients 167
Affect-motor sphere 148
Aggressive behaviour 13
Aggressive-destructive impulses 
196–197, 200, 202
Ahumada, Jorge L. 35, 153, 
175, 267
American academy of child and 
adolescent psychiatry 12
American pragmatism 259
American Psychiatric 
Association 108
Analysis terminable and interminable 
34, 114–115
Anna-Freudian terminology 87
Antagonism 227Anterior hypothalamus 
(MPOA) 61
Anti-Semitism 229
Approach/withdrawal 100
Asperger, Hans 154
Attachment 53–71
and the arms-race 60–61
categories 15
clinical illustration 67–70
clinical implications 65–67
developmental risks and their 
sequelae 77–84
hyperactivity 62
neurobiology of 61–65
theory and trauma 58–59
understanding of 60–65
Attachment, trauma, and 
psychoanalysis
psychoanalysis meets 
neuroscience 87–92

Attention Deﬁ  cit Disorder (ADD) 
8, 154
Attention Deﬁ  cit Hyperactivity 
Disorder (ADHD) 3, 9, 14, 33
anamnestic information on 
parents and their history 
126–129
and culture 29–30
and extraordinarily talented 
children 30
and trauma 28
as precursor to ADHD 107
biological roots of 6
biomedical models of 143–145
cases 126
central psychological deﬁ  cits 9
children 11–18, 26, 36, 150
children in social situations 5
children treatment 132–135
clinical picture of 150
cognitive-behavioral/medical 
treatments of 16
complexities of 39
controversional theoretical 
positions with treatments 
11–17
current status of overdiagnosis 
of 98–105
development of 146
diagnosis and severe 
behavioural problems 25
diagnosis 6, 21, 27, 105, 107, 
120, 139, 145, 150
dramatic increase in treating 7
dysfunctions in 4
early development and its 
disturbances 51
from empirical and clinical 
perspectives 143–151
frontal lobe contribution to 19
genesis of 14, 185in Frankfurt Prevention study 
(FP) 191
in psychoanalysis with child 
and adult 185–203
in psychoanalytic 
psychotherapy 189
in psychoanalytic 
terminology 145
inappropriate diagnosis of 106
initial meeting with 129–132
Michael’s 23
molecular genetics network 119
motion and meaning 123–140
mourning or depression 31–33
multidimensional model of 83
multimodal treatment of 6, 12
neural differences in 18
neuro-imaging studies 9
neurological syndrome 16
Parenting Practices of Mothers 
of Children 80
phenotype 119
primitive defence 
mechanisms 125
psychiatric diagnosis of 145
psychoanalytic concepts on the 
aetiology of 17
psychoanalytic inquiry of 
123–140
psychoanalytic understanding 
of 5
psychoanalytic view 105
relationship of temperament 105
remarks on questions of 
technique 135–136
resilience of children with 25
Robert’s symptoms 26
stringent deﬁ  nition 107
symptomatic 145
symptoms 26, 29, 187
symptoms of Rahel 32282  INDEX

syndrome 5, 22
transvestite symptoms 27
understanding children 
with 16–17
Autism, evolution of the concept 
153–157
Autistic
child 168
contiguous defences 151
disturbances of affective 
contact 154
mimetic dynamics 165–171
spectrum disorders (ASD) 
175–176
Autistic Barriers in Neurotic 
Patients 156
Autobiographical memory 83
Autotomy 168
Auto-sensuality 170
Bartels’s and Zeki’s 
fMRI-ﬁ  ndings 89
BASICS proﬁ  le of behavioural 
adjustment 103, 110
Battles on the Setting and First 
Settlements 132
Behavioural adjustment, BASICS 
proﬁ  le of 103
Behaviouristic turn 252
Berna, Jaques 197
Beyond the Pleasure Principle 229
Bion, Wilfrid 57, 155
concept of ‘containment’ 125
proto-emotive 170
proto-mental 170
special reference to theory 
of thinking 153–171
theory of thinking to account 
for autistic-mimetic 
dynamics 165–171
clinical case 176–179Sophia’s
clinical narrative 157–162
conceptual comments 
162–165
conceptual discussion 
179–182
‘going on being’ 177
mimetic autism 153–171
personal space 165
Biopsychosocial model 12
Bipolar disorder
current status of overdiagnosis 
of 98–105
Bowlby, John 58
attachment theory 213
Brain-imaging data 18
Brain mechanism 8
self-awareness 59–60
Brain organic problem, in children 
22–25
Branik, Emil 36
Breast-feeding 127
Busch de Ahumada, Luisa C. 151, 
153, 175
Canestri, Jorge 3, 34, 113
Cantwell, Dennis 9
Carey, William B. 34, 97, 113, 
118, 120
Causation 6
Central-European 
understanding 258
Cerebral dysfunctions 12
Changed childhood 11
Child
idiosyncratic psychological 21
psychiatrists 84
psychiatry and 
psychotherapy 143
psychoanalysis 192
psychoanalysts 84INDEX   283

psychosis 154
temperament on parents 102
Childhood mimetic autism 168
Children’s temperament, coping 
with 97–111
Child-stimuli parameter 78
Cognitive
behavioural 12
turn 252
Cognitivism 250
Comorbid
mental health condition 
107, 120
symptoms 13
Concept group 242
change of 243–244
problems of variety in 244
Conceptual research programme 
247–248
Conduct disorder 9
Connectionism 239–265
plea for 262–265
Corrective emotional 
experience 105
Counter-transference 91
Clinical research in psychoanalysis 35
Conception of Wholes and Parts in 
Early Infantile Autism 154
Counter-transference reactions 36
Crisis-of-two-ness 164
Darwin left evolutionary 
theory 210
DBH gene 119
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual 
(DSM-IV-TR APA 2000) 105, 
119, 154
diagnosis 106
implicitly adheres 119
problems with diagnostic 
system 108–109
Diphasic pathogenesis 226Disruptive Disorders in 
Childhood 9
Distractibility 100
Domination free discourse 263
Dopamine transporter gene 
(DAT1-allel) 81
Dopamine-deﬁ  cit hypothesis 144
Dopamine-ß-hydroxylase 119
Doria-Medina, Roberto 267
Dreher, Anna Ursula 38, 239
Drive and trauma 219–236
DSM-II 8
Dual Arousal Systems Model 63
Ego
capacity 147
functions 147
integration 170
psychology 92, 186
Ego-paralyzing automatic 
anxiety 234
Eitingon, Max 235
Elements of Psychoanalysis 57
Embodied Cognitive 
Science 35, 37
Emotional distrurbances 13
Emotional trauma 105
Empirical attachment theory 15
Endogenous factor 115
Entangled mothers 190
Environmentalism 35
EPF (European Psychoanalytical 
Federation) 214
Epidemiological 
characterization 9
Evidence-based medicine,
Externalizing mechanisms 139
Face-to-face relationship 136
Fairbairn, R.D. 186
FAUSTLOS 5
Feldman, Ruth 78284  INDEX

Ferenczi, Sándor 233
Ferro, Antonino 166
First World War 225
Fischer, Annette Streek 35
Fixation 115
fMRI (functional Magnetic 
Resonance Imaging) 119
Fonagy, Peter 53, 189
discussion of his paper 77–92
mentalization and psychosocial 
developmental model 81
Frankfurt Prevention Study  (FPS) 
4, 21–22, 32
French psychoanalysts 92
Freud, Anna 87, 211
conception of method and 
theory 271
hypothesis of narcissism 213
second theory of aggression 
211–212
theories of aggression 211
Freudian concept of 
complementary series 34, 114
Freudian equation 118
Freud’s greatest contribution 56
Freud, Sigmund 221
conception of sexuality 227
Frontal lobe functions 19
Functional Magnetic Resonance 
Imaging (FMRI) 23
Fundamental emotional 
systems 136
Gaddini, Renata 156
Gene-environment-interactions 81
German Psychoanalytic 
Association 251
Goeppel, Gerlinde 26
Göttinger Form 
repreoduktions-Test 23
Green, André 157, 240, 251
Greenson, Miss C. Ralph 91Green–Wallerstein debate 255–257
Grubrich-Simitis, Ilse 38, 219
Hanly, Charles 185, 209
Hauser, Stuart 25
HAWIK (Hamburg Wechsler 
Intelligence Test) 23
Hippocampal damage 67
Hitler’s seizure of power and 
excesses of anti-Semitism 229
Hyperactive
child syndrome 8
reaction of childhood 8
Hyperkinetic
impulse disorder 8
symptoms 13
Hypothetico-deductive method 273
Ice Age 223
Imaginative mental activity 55
Independent arousal systems 63
Index, Hampstead 242, 245
Industrial century 10
Infantile seduction 228
Infantile sexual traumas 228
Infantilism of sexuality 228
Information-processing 
systems 259
Institute for Psychoanalytic 
Treatments of Children and 
Adolescents 5
Intensity 100
International Psychoanalytic 
Association 87
International Psychological 
Associations’s Conceptual 
Research Committee 220
International Statistical 
Classiﬁ  cation of Diseases and 
Related Health Problems
 (ICD) 241
Intrinsic cerebral malfunction 105INDEX   285

Introductory Lectures on 
Psycho-Analysis 228
IPA Congress 3
Jacobson, Edith 64
Johi’s serious social problems 29
Joseph Sandler Research 
Conference 6, 37
Journal of the American Academy 
of Child and Adolescent 
Psychiatry 9
Joyce, Angela 175
Kächele, Horst 35
Kandel, Eric 77
Kantian space and time 212
Kleinian conceptual
bearings 155
framework 154–156
Klein, Melanie 154
distinction 188
path-breaking research 156
self-consistent 216
Klein, Sydney 156
Kohutian theory 212
Kölner Mutimodale Therapiestudie 13
Kramer Intelligence Test 31
Kuhn, Thomas 244, 272
Lamarckian mode of 
transmission 223
Lehmkuhl, Gerd 77
Leuzinger-Bohleber, Marianne 3, 
22, 35, 120, 185, 220–221, 236
Linguistic and social cognitive 
capacities 94
Linguistic turn 252
Long-lasting chronic stress 147
Mahler, Margaret 156
autism and symbiosis 154
MAOA gene 117Marty, Pierre 92
Massive traumatization 233
Masson, Jeffrey 232
Maternal sensitivity 15
Mayes, Linda 87
MCD (Minimal Cerebral 
Dysfunction) 192
McDevitt, Sean 102
McGill University 8
Medina, Doria 38
Mental health and 
psychopathology 227
Mentalization 55, 60, 64, 66, 93
ability of 148
attachment and the arms-race 
60–61
capacity for 191
concept of 91
decouples 70
developmental risks and their 
sequelae 77–84
imaginative leap of 69
successful process 80
Mesocorticolimbic dopaminergic 
reward circuit 94
Metzler, Donald 155
Michael´s probability score 23
Michael’s oedipal developmental 
phase 24
Michael’s retarded sensory motor 
development 23
Mimetic autism 163
Mimetic mirroring 169
Mimetic/symbiotic component 163
Mind–body problem 5
Minimal brain damage 8
Minimal brain dysfunction 8, 24
Mitrani, Judith 157
Modern psychiatry 271
MonoAmine Oxidase A 117
Mood 100
Mother–baby dyad 88286  INDEX

Mother–child interaction 77, 79
Mother–infant psychoanalytic 
treatment 90
Motor skills 124
Multi-factorial models of 
illness 115
Narcissistic
depressive disorder 146
disorder 146
mortiﬁ  cations 230
neuroses 223
National socialism 260
Nature/nurture polarity 115
Nature/nurture relationship 115
Nature Neuroscience 37
Negative mother–child 
interactions 9
Neo-Lamarckian 
convictions 230
lines 224
Neopositivistic empiricism 249
Neuro turn 252
Neurodevelopmental disorder 105
Neuropsychiatric disorders 3
Neuroscientiﬁ  c-attachment theory 
58–60
New Introductory 
Conferences 271
New Orleans Congress panel 
267–277
New York Longitudinal 
Study 99, 113
New York Psychoanalytic 
Institute 220
Newton’s theory 210
Non-genetic physical factors 118
Non-psychoanalytic scientists 36
Oedipal developmental phase 24
Oedipus complex 212, 227, 263
Oppositional Deﬁ  ant Disorder 9Ordinary language turn 259
Organic brain 21
pathology 23
Organicism 35
Panksepp 20
Paranoid-schizoid 57
position 188
Parent–child interaction, 
micro-analysis of 78
Parent–infant bond 77
Parent-infant-interactions 77
The Patient and the Analyst 261
Pavlov, Ivan 99
Peaceful and concentrated 
togetherness 136
Peircean fallibilism 272
Persistence/attention span 100
Peterson, Bradley 37
PET (Positron Emission 
Tomography) 119
Phylogenetic fantasy 222, 225, 
228–229
Pluralism
in theory and research 239–265
of psychoanalytic 
theories 253
simple research 254
simple theory 253
Positive masculine model 139
Postencephalitic behaviour 
disorder 8
Post-Freudian
psychoanalytic culture 118
theorizing 211
Post-Kleinian object 88
Post-natal maturation process 125
Post-traumatic subjective 56
Poustka, Fritz 36
Pre-natal maturation process 126
Pre-schizo-paranoid 171
Primary seduction 88INDEX   287

Projective identiﬁ  cation 64
Melanie Klein’s conception 
of 64
The Protective Shell in Children and 
Adults 156
Pseudo mental subnormality 193
Pseudo scientiﬁ  c classiﬁ  cation 8
Psychiatric disorder 10
Psychic
binding 229
equivalence, non-mentalizing 
mode of 70
reality 57
suffering 166
trauma 242
truths 188
Psychism 170
Psychoanalysis 3, 34, 36, 53–71, 93, 
143, 211, 231, 239, 249, 251, 273
between nature and culture 257
clinical implications 65–67
complete research ﬁ  eld in 250
contemporary 17, 245
epistemology of 217
meeting of neuroscience 
53–71, 87
object with such 
patients 65–66
present-day 220
research in 254
role of memory work in 70
thoughts on 248–251
understandings of 255
Psychoanalytic
aetiological theory 225
community 232
conceptualization 16
development 
phenomenology 55
formulations 89
knowledge 210, 214
pluralism, contemporary 210schools 16
self-psychology 188
therapy 23, 28
The Psychoanalytic Quarterly 209
Psychoanalytic research
early development and ADHD 
3–40
hopes, views, controversial 
discussion 207
in logic, meaning, and truth 
209–218
Psychoanalytic theory 4
uniﬁ  ed mainstream 209
unity and veriﬁ  ability in 
209–218
Psychodynamic causation 82
Psychological integrity 59
Psychoneurotic symptoms 226
Psychopathology
CNS-based 34, 113
development of 78
current status of overdiagnosis 
of 98–105
on on-going development 179
Psychopharmacological treatments 
12–13
Psycho-physiological—abstraction 
170
Psycho-social
environment 118
factors 9
stress factors 79
synchronization 83
Psychotherapeutic assistance 126
Psychotherapeutic help 234
Psychotropic drugs 113
Ptolemaic belief 216
Quantitative-empirical 
psychotherapy researchers 241
Quasi-mythological 
transmission 233288  INDEX

Reactive behaviour problems 
100, 106
Research-pluralism 254–255, 262
Retarded sensory motor 
development 23
Rhythmicity 100
Rio de Janeiro Congress 119
Ritalin® 4, 98, 113, 126
Role of Genotype in the Cycle of 
Violence in Maltreated 
Children 117
Rough-and-tumble games 20, 27
Salomonsson, Björn 36, 87
Sandler, Anne-Marie 56, 91
Sandler, Joseph 241
Scales, Conner 21
Schizo-paranoid 171
Schizophrenia, symptomatic triad 
diagnostic for 153
Second world war 260
Secure attachment behaviour 15
Seduction theory 225
Segal, Hanna 57
Self-awareness 59–60, 63
Self-fragmentation 94
Self-harming behaviour 82
Self-object differentiation 156
Self-regulating functions 78
Semantic vagueness 244
Sensitive moment-by-moment 
adaptation 78
Sensoriality 170
Sensory threshold 100
Sexual
stimulation 226
transgressions 225
Sigmund-Freud-Institute 16, 36, 240
Sleed, Michelle 87
Slow-to-warm-up children 101
Social anxiety disorder 120
Social brain, evolution 59Social referencing 188
Social/sexual activity 61
Sophia’s
clinical narrative 157–162
conceptual comments 162–165
mimetic autism 153–171
personal space 165
Speciﬁ  c psychiatric disorders 9
Staufenberg, Adelheid 35
Staufenberg, Heidi 123
Stauffenberg, Frau 146
Stern, Daniel 189
Strange Situation 15
Streeck-Fischer, Annette 143
Super ego 132
Swain, James 77
Symbiotic psychoses 162
Target, Mary 3, 189
mentalization and psychosocial 
developmental model 81
Temperament
assessment 102
coping with children’s 113–121
current status of knowledge 
and research 104
deﬁ nition 98–99
differences in children 98
early development and its 
disturbances 113–121
environment misﬁ  t 106
goodness or poorness of ﬁ  t 101
history 99
management 104
neurological explanation 105
NYLS dimensions of 100
of child 102
origins and stability 101–102
pathologized 107
practical importance 102–104
problems with DSM diagnostic 
system 108–109INDEX   289

psychological 
interpretations 105
relationship to ADHD and 
other psychopathology 
105–106
relationship to other 
psychopathology 108
role of 105–106
traits and clusters 100
variation 108
Theory-pluralism 254–255, 262
Therapeutic holding or therapeutic 
containing 235
Thomas, Alexander 99
Totem and Taboo 223, 229
Transference interpretations 91
Trauma 53–71
clinical illustration 67–70
clinical implications 65–67
developmental risks and their 
sequelae 77–84
hyperactivity 62
model 226, 235
neurobiology of 61–65recovering memories 66–67
understanding of 60–65
Trauma model/drive model 235
Trauma triggers the attachment 
system 58
Tustinian conceptual frame, 
autism-derived 153
University Clinic for Child and 
Adolescent Psychiatry 28
Varvin, Sverre 236
Vasopressin sensitive circuit 61
Vienna Psychoanalytic Society 235
Waldung, Christina 26
Wallerstein, Robert 251
unsustainable argument 210
Winnicott, Donald 64
theory of ‘holding 179
Wissenschaft 35
Womblike communal situation 161
Zepf, Siegfried 92290  INDEX