Critical Acclaim for
The Developing Mind
“[This book] fulfilled my wildest expectations. Instead of laboriously strug -
gling to learn about neurobiology, I found myself fairly effortlessly assimilat -
ing information because 1) the author is able to present his material in the
context of interpersonal relationships in general and the treatment dyad inparticular, and 2) the author is a master of lucidity, avoids pedantry, andsucceeds in making his data clinically useful.”
—American Journal of Psychiatry
“This amazing synthesis of neurobiological research and clinical expertise
should forever lay to rest the mind–brain dichotomy. The book is beautifullyconstructed, including highly readable descriptions of brain development,information processing, models of memory and narrative, and the importanceof attachment in human development. Siegel also shows how healthy rela -
tionships and psychotherapeutic interventions can offer us a ‘second chance’
to undo maladaptive patterns and insecure early attachments. This book issuitable for anyone working in the fields of mental health or neuroscience,and will be a superb guide for medical students and psychiatric residents.”
—Clarice J. Kestenbaum, MD,
Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons
“Will appeal to college-level students of neurobiology .... Keys to mental
health and dysfunction emerge as the author explores differences betweengenetics and brain programming.”
—The Midwest Book Review
“This is a remarkable book .... I t takes an especially gifted intellect with an
extraordinary breadth of interests and expertise to be capable of the integra -
tive tour de force .... Most impressively, [Siegel] weaves a complex, plausi -
ble and compelling theoretical synthesis on the bidirectional influences of
interpersonal experience and brain development and functioning ....
The Developing Mind boldly transcends the reductionism that characterizes
so much of contemporary psychiatry.”
—Psychiatric Times
“In this extraordinary book, Siegel creatively integrates state-of-the-art knowl -
edge of emotional development, neurobiology, cognitive science, attachment
research, and complexity theory. The resulting model cogently describes howa developing brain/mind organizes itself in the context of an emotional rela -
tionship with other brain/minds. This cutting-edge volume is essential reading
for clinicians, researchers, and anyone who is intrigued by one of science’sfundamental problems—the psychobiological origins of the human mind.”
—Allan N. Schore, PhD, School of Medicine,
University of California, Los Angeles

“The author has succeeded in integrating knowledge from several disciplines
about interpersonal experience, human mental processes, and neurobiology toconstruct a conceptual foundation for an ‘interpersonal neurobiology’ of thedeveloping mind .... N o other book has addressed this subject so compre -
hensively, and it is sure to prove a valuable resource for those with primary
neurophysiological knowledge and interests, especially students, scholars, andprofessionals in such associated areas as psychiatry, neuropsychology, develop -
mental and professional psychology, and cognitive science.”
—Readings
“Siegel’s brilliant, concise synthesis of cutting-edge research in cognitive neu -
roscience and attachment theory provides the family therapist with a power -
ful way of understanding the origins of our behaviors in relationships. When
I have shared these ideas with the families, couples, and students I see inclinical practice and in teaching, their response has been overwhelmingly pos -
itive. Siegel helps us make sense of mysteries of experience with which we all
wrestle.”
—Gillian Walker, MSW, Senior Faculty,
Ackerman Institute for the Family, New York
“For mind scientists, these are exciting but humbling times. As we learn
more about the brain, we see how one-sided our abstract models of mentallife have been. Focusing on what single heads can perceive, think, and learn,neuropsychology has disregarded our inborn ability to imitate, imagine, andsympathize with the feelings of others. This clear and straightforward booksets forth a new understanding of how communicated emotions influence theregulation of brain circuit growth and the consolidation of cognitive systems.Siegel demonstrates an impressive grasp of how the brain is believed to knowand remember, a deep sensitivity to the joys and sorrows of human relation-ships, and a child psychiatrist’s will to bridge the gap between scientific andclinical knowledge. This book will be of interest to clinicians, clinicians-in-training, and all those wishing to stay abreast of the new, more natural sci -
ence of communicating minds.”
—Colwyn Trevarthen, PhD, Department of Psychology,
University of Edinburgh, UK
“Brilliant .... Should probably not be read at one sitting, but sifted slowly as
you would a 20 year old port .... This is not just a book for bright psychi -
atric residents or child fellows, but child psychiatrists young and old, over-
worked or under-paid. It offers a glimpse of new horizons in the profession,and may be the harbinger of a fresh archetype for child psychiatry as itenters the next millennium.”
—The Canadian Child Psychiatry Review

THE DEVELOPING MIND



THE
DEVELOPING
MIND
How Relationships and the Brain
Interact to Shape Who We Are
DANIEL J. SIEGEL, MD
THE GUILFORD PRESS
New York London


© 1999 Daniel J. Siegel
Published by The Guilford Press
A Division of Guilford Publications, Inc.
72 Spring Street, New York, NY 10012
www.guilford.com
All rights reserved
No part of this book may be reproduced, translated, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,electronic, mechanical, photocopying, microfilming, recording, orotherwise, without written permission from the Publisher.
Printed in the United States of America
This book is printed on acid-free paper.
Last digit is print number :987654321
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Siegel, Daniel J., 1957–
The developing mind: how relationships and the brain interact
to shape who we are / Daniel J. Siegel.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.ISBN 1-57230-740-4 (pbk.)1. Developmental psychology. 2. Interpersonal relations.
3. Intellect. 4. Brain—Physiological aspects. I. Title.
BF713 .S525 2001
155—dc21
2001053187
The hardcover edition of The Developing Mind
(ISBN 1-57230-453-7) has the subtitle
“Toward a Neurobiology of Interpersonal Experience.”

To my family,
the deepest source of my nurturance, joy, and inspiration;
and in memory of my teachers,
Dennis P . Cantwell, MD, Robert J. Stoller, MD,
and Thomas J. Whitfield III, MD,
who gave so much of themselves
in sharing their lives with their students.



About the AuthorAbout the Author
/fl2rt
About the Author
Daniel J. Siegel received his medical degree from Harvard University
and completed his postgraduate medical education at the Universityof California, Los Angeles, with training in pediatrics, general adultpsychiatry, and child and adolescent psychiatry. He has served as aNational Institute of Mental Health Research Fellow at UCLA,where he studied family interactions, with an emphasis on howattachment experiences influence emotions, behavioral regulation,autobiographical memory, and narrative processes.
Dr. Siegel’s clinical activities include work as a child, adolescent,
adult, and family psychiatrist. An award-winning educator, he for-merly directed the training program in child psychiatry and theInfant and Preschool Service at UCLA, and is the recipient of thedepartmental teaching award and several honorary fellowships. He iscurrently an associate clinical professor of psychiatry at the UCLASchool of Medicine and serves as the director of interdisciplinarystudies for the international nonprofit Children’s Mental HealthAlliance in New York. He is also the director of the Center forHuman Development, an educational organization that focuses onhow the development of individuals, families, and communities canbe helped by examining the interface of human relationships andbasic biological processes.
Dr. Siegel’s integrated developmental approach has led him to be
invited to local, national, and international organizations to addressgroups of educators, parents, public administrators, healthcare pro -
viders, policymakers, clergy, and neuroscientists. He is the coeditor
of a handbook of psychiatry and the author of several articles and
ix

book chapters. The Developing Mind has been of interest to and
utilized by a number of organizations, including the Council onTechnology and the Individual, the Sundance Institute, the U.S.Department of Justice, the Vatican, and numerous academic depart -
ments worldwide. The overall goal of these educational efforts is to
provide to a wide audience a scientifically grounded view of humanexperience that can help facilitate the development of psychologicalwell-being and emotional resilience across the lifespan.x About the Author

PrefacePreface
/fl2rt
Preface
What is the mind? How does the mind develop? This book synthe-
sizes information from a range of scientific disciplines to explore theidea that the mind emerges at the interface of interpersonal experi-ence and the structure and function of the brain.
Like many adolescents, as a teenager I became filled with a par-
ticular intellectual passion: I was fascinated with people and thenature of the mind. Through a series of journeys, I eventuallybecame a psychiatrist, specializing in the care of children and fami-lies. Along the way have been encounters with a wide variety of peo-ple and the stories of their lives. Trained in science and immersed inhuman struggles, I found myself naturally trying to understand theprocess of human development—of how people become who theyare—by investigating what was known from research and getting asclose as possible to the subjective experience at the core of people’slives. This book presents the integration of this effort to gain insightsinto the mind and human development.
From mountaintops and quiet conversations to lecture halls and
the bustling discussions of a weekend conference, this exploration ofthe nature of the developing mind has come to involve people frommany walks of life. At recent seminars, I have met with a range ofprofessionals—in child development, education, medicine, neurosci -
ence, psychology, public administration, and social work—to discuss
basic questions regarding the mind and the ways experience shapesdevelopment. These experiences as an educator have motivated meto synthesize this work into a framework that provides an integrated
xi

scientific foundation regarding the interpersonal and neurobiological
basis of the developing mind.
This book may be useful for those working in a variety of disci -
plines. Understanding these processes can enable clinicians to help
patients heal. Academicians may find such an interdisciplinary effortuseful in gaining insight into how their own work relates to indepen -
dent fields of research. Educators can benefit from insights into how
emotion and interpersonal relationships are fundamental motiva -
tional aspects of learning and memory. For child development spe -
cialists and others who care for children, knowing how forms of
communication directly shape a child’s developing brain can beessential in creating programs that are scientifically based and thatcan optimize the care of children. For many other people, learningabout how the mind emerges from the substance of the brain and theprocesses of interpersonal relationships can provide useful insightsthat can improve their professional as well as personal lives. Interper-sonal experience shapes the mind as it continues to develop through-out the lifespan. This book is about how these interpersonal pro-
cesses occur and how we can utilize ideas about neurobiology to helpothers, and ourselves, to grow and develop.
In my own field of psychiatry, the tremendous expansion of
neuroscientific research seems to have been interpreted in the extremeby some as a call to “biological determinism”—that is, to a view of psy-chiatric disorders as a result of biochemical processes, most of whichare genetically determined and little influenced by experience. Thisimpression may sound reductionistic, but I wish that the sense ofdemoralization expressed by many educators and students in psychia -
try didn’t support the notion that the field has been losing its mind in
favor of the brain. What is ironic, and what up until now has not beenwell known, is that recent findings of neural science in fact point to justthe opposite: Interactions with the environment, especially relation -
ships with other people, directly shape the development of the brain’s
structure and function. There is no need to choose between brain ormind, biology or experience, nature or nurture. These divisions areunhelpful and inhibit clear thinking about an important and complexsubject: the developing human mind.
As I was finishing up the last chapter revisions for this book, an
article by a renowned neuroscientist who is also trained as a psychia -
trist appeared in the American Journal of Psychiatry. Eric Kandel’s
paper “A New Intellectual Framework for Psychiatry”
1suggests that
the field of psychiatry in recent times has suffered from a series ofxii Preface

damaging divisions within its ranks. These divisions have blocked the
ability to integrate a wide range of information about human experi -
ence, mind, and brain. It is my hope that presenting a scientifically
grounded synthesis focusing on these domains will enable such pro -
fessional divisions to give way to a new conceptual foundation that
will be useful for clinicians and others who help people develop.
Although it is important to be aware of the significant and very
real contributions of genetic and constitutional factors to the out -
come of development, it is equally crucial that we examine what in
fact is known about how experience shapes development. Such a bal -
anced view enables us as parents, for example, to have a sense of
responsibility for the experiences we provide without the unnecessaryburden of guilt generated by the belief that our actions are solelyresponsible for the outcome of our children’s development.
One factor turning some mental health care providers’ attention
away from the role of experience in human development may be ourattempt to avoid some of the devastating errors of the past. Not solong ago, the mothers of children with autism were accused of being“refrigerators”; the families of patients with schizophrenia were saidto be giving “double binds”; individuals with bipolar disorder weregiven thousands of hours of therapy, in search of the “psychologicalcause” of their mood swings; and people with obsessive–compulsivedisorder were thought to be repressing some early trauma that mayhave produced their worries. In each of these painful examples, weas professionals looked toward experience to explain the causes ofour patients’ anguish and dysfunction. Despite the goodness of ourintentions, these views were misguided and not helpful to ourpatients. They produced accusations of blame and a sense of guiltthat were unfounded. They did not lead to growth or healing in ourpatients or their families.
Many people have been spared devastating amounts of pain and
suffering because of our modern understanding of psychiatric illnessand the appropriate use of pharmacological agents. Psychiatry hashad to embrace the notion that the brain contributes to mental dys -
function, in order to pursue these extremely important avenues of
medical care. But losing sight of the important role of experience,especially social experience, in shaping the mind does not help us tounderstand development or to help our patients.
If social factors—that is, human relationships—shape the devel -
opment of the brain and thus the mind, how does this occur? The
purpose of this book is to explore this question by examining somePreface xiii

ways in which interpersonal experience shapes the developing mind
and fosters emotional well-being.
An exciting challenge in writing this book has been to attempt
to deepen an understanding of subjective everyday life, of the mindand human relationships, by drawing on the objective views of sci -
ence. The benefit of this approach is that we can learn much more
about what creates human experience than is possible with onlyeveryday logic or self-reflection. For example, by learning how thecircuits in the brain develop during the first years of life, we can gaininsights into why older children or adults generally cannot con -
sciously recall their experiences before the preschool years. By learn -
ing about the nature of how the brain creates an awareness of other
minds, we can begin to understand the biological basis for emotionalcommunication and what may be occurring when empathy is not apart of human relationships. In addition, understanding how traumaaffects the developing brain can yield insights into the subsequentimpairments in memory processing and the ability to cope withstress. Using science to understand the mind has provided a powerfultool for deepening our comprehension of subjective mental life andinterpersonal relationships. These insights have proven tremendouslyuseful in helping others grow and develop.
To see how these neurobiological ideas help others develop and
heal not only has fueled my enthusiasm, but has generated the energyrequired for the completion of this book. This task would not havebeen possible without the loving support of my family. How manytimes they heard the excited call “It’s finished!”, only to find meworking on the next draft a few weeks later. Their continuingencouragement is of immeasurable importance to me.
When The Guilford Press initially asked me to write this book,
its focus was to be on memory and psychotherapy. Since that time,the topic of the book has broadened; it has come to include, with thehelpful assistance of my patient editor, Kitty Moore, the much widertopic of these fundamental questions about the mind, the brain, andhuman relationships. I thank her for her belief in the work and herskillful help with the process of bringing it to completion. I wouldalso like to express my appreciation to the efficient and responsivepublication staff at Guilford, and especially to Anna Brackett andMarie Sprayberry, for their thoughtful attention to the text.
In my professional life, it can’t be overstated that my patients
have had the largest impact on my clinical education. In ways bothprofessional and personal, they have taught me more than I everdreamed I’d learn in a lifetime. I have also had the good fortune ofxiv Preface

having had several clinical teachers who have been especially sup -
portive and helpful in my development as a psychotherapist, includ -
ing Jim Grotstein, MD, Chris Heinicke, PhD, Regina Pally, MD,
Arnold Scheibel, MD, and Don Schwartz, MD. Also along the jour -
ney have been many students—especially those in the Infant and Pre -
school Service, which I direct with Mary O’Connor, PhD, at
UCLA—whose questions keep an investigating and conceptualizingmind reflective and excited about trying both to understand and tocommunicate complex ideas. One of the most moving teaching expe -
riences has come from the opportunity to work with many teams of
psychotherapists from over a dozen nations in Eastern Europe whohave been struggling to deal with the ravages of political wars andchildhood abuse. The Children’s Mental Health Alliance Foundation,directed by Pamela Sicher, MD, and Owen Lewis, MD, has devel -
oped a novel educational program to teach these devoted and sacri -
ficing therapists the basic elements of evaluating, treating, and (we
all hope) preventing child abuse in their developing nations. It isinspiring to see their dedication, and exhilarating to hear that theideas of this book have been accessible and useful across cultures.
These issues about how experiences shape the brain and thus orga-
nize the mind have been topics of passionate discussion for a localstudy group called, affectionately, the ID-CNS (Institute for Develop-mental and Clinical Neural Science). My thanks to its members—LouCozolino, PhD, Allan Schore, PhD, Judith Schore, PhD, and JohnSchumann, PhD—for our intellectual companionship on this journeyinto mind and brain. My childhood friend and longtime conversationpartner in matters of the mind, Jonathan Fried, has offered valuablecomments on the text and has been especially helpful in pointing outthe abundance of “thuses” in the original manuscript; thus I thank him.Others who have read this work at various stages in its evolution andhave provided immensely useful comments and questions include Dan -
iel Attias, Lisa Capps, PhD, Leston Havens, MD, Erik Hesse, Althea
Horner, PhD, Mary Main, PhD, Eleanor Ochs, PhD, Sarah Steinberg,Caroline Welch, and several anonymous reviewers through the editingprocess at The Guilford Press.
Several other people also need to be acknowledged. In medical
school, Tom Whitfield III, MD, was my pediatric mentor and friendwho taught me early on that “the way to care for patients is to careabout them.” The initial version of what was to become this bookwas begun on a trip to visit Tom and his wife, Peg, in the Berkshiresbefore his death in 1996. The lessons I have learned from trying tomake sense of the process of losing such an important attachmentPreface xv

figure in my life are contained within these pages. Another person in
those years who “saved my life” in medical school is Leston Havens,MD, who gave me the strength to hold on to my own experience inthe confusing Boston psychiatric climate at the time. During myyears of adult and child psychiatric residency, Joel Yager, MD, andthe late Dennis Cantwell, MD, supported my explorations of differ -
ent directions and my efforts to organize my professional passions.
In my National Institute of Mental Health research training years atUCLA, Marian Sigman, PhD, and Rob ert Bjork, PhD, were extremely
supportive in guiding me through the wonderful interdisciplinarylearning that the research fellowship allowed.
During many of those years as a trainee in psychiatry, I had the
honor of being supervised by Robert Stoller, MD, who devoted muchof his professional life to exploring the ways in which early life expe -
riences shape development. We would spend hours discussing
patients, the mind, and our own experiences as therapists. One ofour topics was about human communication. As Bob wrote in oneof his last books before his tragic accidental death:
Still, yearning for clarity contains a pleasure of which I am only
now fully aware. Sometimes, on paring a sentence down to its bar-est minimum, I find it transforms into a question, paradox, or joke(all three being different states of the same thing, like ice, waterand steam). That is a relief: clarity asks; it does not answer. Maybethen, in a hundred years, sitting on my haunches like a Zen mas-ter, I shall finally write a clear sentence. But it will have no words.
2
I have tried my best to use simple language, to avoid unneces -
sary jargon, and to make sentences concise and clear. Though words
are limited in their ability to convey exactly what we mean, they areone of our only ways of sharing information about complex ideas, aswell as about simple truths. Words enable us to communicate acrossthe boundaries of time and space that separate one mind fromanother. Words allow us to tell the stories of our lives and relate thescientific explorations that reflect our drive to understand ourselvesand the world in which we live. I hope that the stories and science inthe book will help people to understand the social brain more fullyand to focus our attention on the many intriguing and importantunanswered questions about interpersonal experience and the devel -
oping mind across the lifespan.xvi Preface

ContentsContents
/fl2rt
Contents
CHAPTER 1Introduction: Mind, Brain, and Experience 1
CHAPTER 2Memory 23
CHAPTER 3Attachment 67
CHAPTER 4Emotion 121
CHAPTER 5Representations: Modes of Processing
and the Construction of Reality160
CHAPTER 6States of Mind: Cohesion, Subjective
Experience, and Complex Systems208
CHAPTER 7Self-Regulation 239
CHAPTER 8Interpersonal Connection 276
CHAPTER 9Integration 301
NOTES 339
REFERENCES 357
INDEX 387
xvii



THE DEVELOPING MINDIntroduction
CHAPTER 1
/fl2rt
Introduction
Mind, Brain, and Experience
THE DEVELOPING MIND
AND HUMAN RELATIONSHIPS
The mind emerges from the activity of the brain, whose structure
and function are directly shaped by interpersonal experience. Thisbook explores how recent findings from the study of human develop-ment and neurobiology can bring us to a new understanding of thedeveloping mind.
There are many views from science on how the mind functions,
providing in-depth but distinct perspectives on human experience.For example, neuroscience can inform us about how the brain givesrise to mental processes such as memory and perception. Develop -
mental psychology offers us a view of how children’s minds grow
within families across time. Psychiatry gives us a clinical view of howindividuals may suffer from emotional and behavioral disturbancesthat profoundly alter the course of their lives. Often these disciplinesfunction in isolation from one another. Yet, when one attempts tosynthesize their recent findings, an incredible convergence of many ofthese independent fields of study is revealed. These findings shedlight on how the mind emerges from the substance of the brain as itis shaped by interpersonal relationships. My aim is to provide anoverview and integration of some of these scientific perspectives, inorder to build a foundation for a neurobiology of interpersonal expe -
rience.
1

The ideas of this framework are organized around three funda -
mental principles:
1. The human mind emerges from patterns in the flow of
energy and information within the brain and between brains.
2. The mind is created within the interaction of internal neuro -
physiological processes and interpersonal experiences.
3. The structure and function of the developing brain are deter -
mined by how experiences, especially within interpersonal
relationships, shape the genetically programmed maturationof the nervous system.
In other words, human connections shape the neural connections
from which the mind emerges.
What is the mind? There is an entity called the “mind” that is as
real as the heart or the lungs or the brain, though it cannot be seenwith or without a microscope. The foundation of the mind parallelsa dictionary definition of the psyche: “1. the human soul; 2. theintellect; 3. psychiatry—the mind considered as a subjectively per-ceived, functional entity, based ultimately upon physical processesbut with complex processes of its own: it governs the total organismand its interaction with the environment.”
1
Because it reveals the connection between brain structure and
function, current neuroscience provides us with new insights intohow experience shapes mental processes.
2By altering both the activ-
ity and the structure of the connections between neurons, experiencedirectly shapes the circuits responsible for such processes as memory,emotion, and self-awareness. We can use an understanding of theimpact of experience on the mind to deepen our grasp of how thepast continues to shape present experience and influence futureactions. Insights into the mind, brain, and experience can provide awindow into these connections across time, allowing us to seehuman development in a four-dimensional way.
This book attempts to synthesize concepts and findings from a
range of scientific disciplines, including those studying attachment,child development, communication, complex systems, emotion, evo -
lution, information processing, memory, narrative, and neurobiology.
I have attempted to provide enough of an introduction for those whomay be totally unfamiliar with these domains to be able to under -
stand the material and apply the relevant findings in their profes -
sional work and personal lives. When we examine what is known2 THE DEVELOPING MIND

about how the mind develops, we can gain important insights into
the ways in which people can continue to grow throughout life. Themind does not stop developing even as we grow past childhood andadolescence. Through understanding the connections between mentalprocesses and brain functioning, we can build a neurobiologicalfoundation for the ways in which interpersonal relationships—bothearly in life and throughout adulthood—continue to play a centralrole in shaping the emerging mind.
ENERGY AND INFORMATION
The mind—the patterns in the flow of energy and information—canbe described as emanating from the activity of the neurons of thebrain.
3Several different measures of forms of energy can be used to
study these. Brain imaging studies examine the metabolic, energy-consuming processes in specific neural regions, or the blood flow tocertain areas that are thought to be a clustering of localized neuronalactivity. Electroencephalograms (EEGs) assess the electrical activityacross the surface of the brain as measured by electrodes on thehead. These assessments of “energy flow” are not popularized, unsci-entific views of the flow of some mysterious energy through the uni-verse. Neuroscience studies the way in which the brain functionsthrough the energy-consuming activation of neurons. The degree andlocalization of this arousal and activation within the brain—this flowof energy—directly create our mental processes.
But the mind is more than the flow of energy across time within
the brain. The mind is also about the flow of information.
4
The mind has distinct modes of processing information. For
example, our sensory systems can respond to stimuli from the out -
side world, such as sights or sounds, and can “represent” this infor -
mation as patterns of neural firing that serve as mental symbols. The
activity of the brain creates “representations” of various types ofinformation about the outer and inner worlds. For example, we haverepresentations of sensations in the body, of perceptions from ourfive senses, of ideas and concepts, and of words. Each of these formsof representation is thought to be created in different circuits of thebrain. These information-processing modes can act independently,and also have important interactions with one another that directlyaffect their processing. We can have complex representations of sen -
sations, perceptions, ideas, and linguistic symbols as we think, forIntroduction 3

example, of some time in the past. The integration of these distinct
modes of information processing into a coherent whole may be acentral goal for the developing mind across the lifespan.
Interpersonal relationships may facilitate or inhibit this drive to
integrate a coherent experience. Relationships early in life may shapethe very structures that create representations of experience andallow a coherent view of the world: Interpersonal experiencesdirectly influence how we mentally construct reality. This shapingprocess occurs throughout life, but is most crucial during the earlyyears of childhood. Patterns of relationships and emotional commu -
nication directly affect the development of the brain. Studies in ani -
mals, for example, have demonstrated that even short episodes of
maternal deprivation have powerful neuroendocrine effects on theability to cope with future stressful events.
5Studies of human sub -
jects reveal that different patterns of child–parent attachment are
associated with differing physiological responses, ways of seeing theworld, and interpersonal relationship patterns. The communicationof emotion may be the primary means by which these attachmentexperiences shape the developing mind. Research suggests that emo-tion serves as a central organizing process within the brain. In thisway, an individual’s abilities to organize emotions—a product, inpart, of earlier attachment relationships—directly shapes the abilityof the mind to integrate experience and to adapt to future stressors.
THE ORGANIZATION OF THE BOOK
The book is composed of two general forms of information. The sci -
entific findings from a range of disciplines are summarized and syn -
thesized to construct a conceptual foundation for an “interpersonal
neurobiology” of the developing mind. This scientific foundation cre -
ates a new, interdisciplinary view of established knowledge. Concep -
tual implications and new proposals that are derived from data, clin -
ical experience, and synthetic reasoning across disciplines can then be
drawn from this framework.
Each chapter explores a major domain of human experience:
memory, attachment, emotion, representation, states of mind, self-regulation, interpersonal connection, and integration. Presenting theinformation in this sequence allows for an overview of how experi -
ence shapes the mind in the discussions of memory and attachment
before the related topics of emotion and representation are ad -
dressed. The more elaborated processes of states of mind and com -4 THE DEVELOPING MIND

plex systems naturally follow and prepare us for a detailed discus -
sion of the ways in which the mind develops the capacity to organize
its functioning within self-regulation, patterns of interpersonal con -
nection, and mental integration.
Memory
In Chapter 2, research in various forms of memory is summarized in
order to help us understand how our earliest experiences in life shapenot only what we remember, but how we remember and how we shapethe narrative of our lives. Memory can be seen as the way the mindencodes elements of experience into various forms of representation.As a child develops, the mind begins to create a sense of continuityacross time, linking past experiences with present perceptions andanticipations of the future. Within these representational processes,generalizations or mental models of the self and the self with others arecreated; these form an essential scaffold in which the growing mindinteracts with the world.
One way in which the mind attempts to integrate these varied
representations and mental models is within the narrative process.Autobiographical narratives are reviewed, in order to explore howthe mind creates coherence within its own processes and how thiscentral integrative function influences the nature of interpersonalrelationships. In part, such an integrative function reveals the capac-ity of the mind to represent and process the activity of the minds ofboth self and others. Such a capacity appears to be central to secureattachment relationships.
Attachment
This overview of the mind, memory, and autobiographical narrativesets the stage for examining attachment in children as well as inadults in Chapter 3. Repeated patterns of children’s interactions withtheir caregivers become “remembered” in the various modalities ofmemory and directly shape not just what children recall, but how therepresentational processes develop. Behavior, emotion, perceptions,sensations, and models of others are engrained by experiences thatoccur before children have autobiographical memory processes avail -
able to them. These implicit elements of memory also later influence
the structure of autobiographical narratives, which have been foundto differ dramatically across the various attachment patterns.
A profound finding from attachment research is that the mostIntroduction 5

robust predictor of a child’s attachment to parents is the way in
which the parents narrate their own recollections of their childhoodexperiences. This implies that the structure of an adult’s narrativeprocess—not merely what the adult recalls, but how it is recalled—is
the most powerful feature in predicting how an adult will relate to achild. Studies of couples expecting their first child can predict howeach parent will relate to their yet-to-be-born infant by examiningthe nature of the narratives of their own childhoods. The practicalrelevance of this finding is explored, along with other important dis -
coveries from the field of adult attachment. These attachment studies
provide a framework for understanding how communication withinrelationships facilitates the development of the mind.
Emotion
The primary ingredient of secure attachment experiences is the pat-tern of emotional communication between child and caregiver. Thisfinding raises the fundamental question of why emotion is so impor-tant for the evolving identity and functioning of a child, as well as inthe establishment of adult relationships.
Chapter 4 further explores the role of emotion in shaping inter-
personal relationships and the human mind. What is emotion? Whydoes a child require emotional communication and the alignment ofemotional states in order to allow for healthy development? Toattempt to answer these questions fully, we need to synthesize anumber of independent perspectives. The way the mind establishesmeaning—the way it places value or significance on experience—isclosely linked to social interactions. This connection between mean -
ing and interpersonal experience occurs because these two processes
appear to be mediated via the same neural circuits responsible forinitiating emotional processes. Research into the nature of emotionserves as the foundation of a synthetic framework for understandingits central role in creating our subjective and our interpersonal expe -
riences.
Representations
In Chapter 5, the way the mind creates mental representations of
experience is reviewed in detail. Emotion can be seen as the funda -
mental process of the mind that links states of arousal with the
appraisal of the value or the meaning of its own representational6 THE DEVELOPING MIND

processes. In this way, the mind’s creation of representations provides
us with insight into how reality is shaped by emotional and interper -
sonal processes. Our internal experiences are constructive processes;
our interpersonal relationships help shape the ways in which theserepresentational processes develop. Emotion can thus be seen as anintegrating process that links the internal and interpersonal worlds ofthe human mind.
From the beginning of life, the brain has an asymmetry in its cir -
cuitry, which leads to the specialization of functions on each side of
the brain. The ways in which the mind creates representations ofexperience is shaped by this lateralization of function. The capacitiesto sense another person’s emotions, to understand others’ minds, andeven to express one’s own emotions via facial expressions and toneof voice are all mediated predominantly by the right side of thebrain. In certain insecure attachment patterns, communication be -
tween parent and child may lack these aspects of emotions and men-tal experience. In contrast, secure attachments seem to involve the
sharing of a wide range of representational processes from both sidesof the brain. In essence, such balanced interpersonal communicationallows the activity of one mind to sense and respond to the activityof another. Such sharing of activity can be seen as the sharing ofstates of mind, the topic of the next chapter.
States of Mind
Chapter 6 examines how different mental processes are organizedwithin a state of mind. These states allow disparate activities of thebrain to become cohesive at a given moment in time. A single brainfunctions as a system that can be understood by examining the “the -
ory of nonlinear dynamics of complex systems,” or, more briefly,
“complexity theory.” This perspective has been applied to a range ofinanimate and living systems in an attempt to understand the oftenunpredictable but self-organizing nature of complex clusters of enti -
ties functioning as a system. The human brain has recently been
examined by a number of theoreticians as one such system. Chapter6 reviews these ideas and then proposes how the laws of such com -
plex systems can be applied not only to the single mind, but to the
functioning of two or more minds acting as a single system. Thisnew application allows us to deepen our earlier discussion of statesof mind and their fundamental importance in both creating internalsubjective experience and shaping the nature of human relationships.Introduction 7

Self-Regulation
Chapter 7 then explores self-regulation—the way the mind organizes
its own functioning—by examining how complex systems, such asthe mind and interpersonal relationships, regulate the flow of theirstates by various means. Self-regulation is fundamentally related tothe modulation of emotion. As we’ll see, this process involves theregulation of the flow of energy and information via the modulationof arousal and the appraisal of meaning of cognitive representationsof experience. Emotion regulation is initially developed from withininterpersonal experiences in a process that establishes self-organizationalabilities.
Interpersonal Connection
Chapter 8 examines the nature of the connections between minds.Interpersonal relationships shape the mind by allowing new states toemerge within interactions with others. Though relationships early inlife shape the structural development of the brain, the mind appears tobe open to ways in which interpersonal experience continues to facili-tate development throughout the lifespan. Examples from families andindividual patients in psychotherapy are offered to illustrate these ideasby examining how patterns of communication between parent andchild help determine the ways in which self-regulation emerges early indevelopment. These patterns can help us to understand how relation-ships throughout life may facilitate emotional well-being. Self-organiza -
tion thus emerges out of self–other interactions.
Integration
At a given time, a state of mind creates cohesion within the various
mental processes that define it. Mental states reflect specific patternsof activity, such as states of anger or shame. Some of these statesbecome engrained over time with characteristic patterns of activity.These states can be seen as “self-states.” How the self creates a senseof coherence across time as various self-states become active isreflected in the concept of integration, the central topic of Chapter 9.“Integration” refers to the way the mind establishes a functionalflow in the states of mind across time. An important means of assess -
ing integration is in the coherence of the structure of autobiographi -
cal narratives. Narrative coherence is reflected in both the way a life8 THE DEVELOPING MIND

story is told and the manner in which life activities are lived. These
linguistic and behavioral outputs are generated from a proposed cen -
tral integrative process. Developing the capacity to integrate mental
coherence is profoundly influenced by experience. In this way,attachment histories revealed in adult attachment narratives reflectthe capacity of the individual to integrate a coherent sense of self.
By organizing the self across past, present, and future, the inte -
grating mind creates a sense of coherence and continuity. In various
forms of mental dysfunction, integration may be impaired, leading toa sense of paralysis or chaos. The ways in which human relationshipsfoster resilience and emotional well-being by facilitating an integra -
tive capacity are explored as part of the developmental framework of
mind, brain, and interpersonal experience.
APPROACHING NEUROBIOLOGY
What are the mechanisms by which human relationships shape brainstructure and function? How is it possible for interpersonal experi-ence—the interactions between two people—to affect something soinherently different as the activity of neurons? Though this book isorganized by a focus on the mental processes described above,exploring insights from neuroscience will greatly enhance our abilityto address these basic questions. For this reason, this introductorychapter offers a brief overview of some relevant aspects of neurobio-logy—the study of the way neurons work and how the brain func -
tions.
(A brief note for those new to thinking about the brain: The aim
of the book is to help you to understand the developing mind byproviding an integration of mental processes [such as memory andemotion] with both neurobiology [such as neural activity in specificcircuits] and interpersonal relationships [such as patterns of commu -
nication]. This integration is indeed the challenge of the book, both
in the writing and in the reading. My concern is that those who arenew to neurobiology—like many of my students in the past—mayinitially feel too overwhelmed by the unfamiliar ideas and vocabularyto continue. Numerous teaching experiences, however, have demon -
strated that the outcome is worth the effort. There are many readily
accessible concepts and much useful information just below the sur -
face of these sometimes new names and ideas. A shared understand -
ing of neurobiology from the beginning will help you in makingIntroduction 9

sense of the intricate and exciting findings about interpersonal rela -
tionships and the developing mind. I have tried to include enough of
a background as the chapters evolve that each domain can be under -
stood by those who may be totally unfamiliar with a given area.
New concepts and vocabulary are inevitable, but I have tried toincorporate information throughout the book in a “user-friendly”manner, summarizing the significance of certain findings and includ -
ing reminders of certain trends as they recur in the book. For those
who are charting new waters, I welcome you to the exciting world ofinterdisciplinary study!)
What follows is a brief overview of some relevant highlights
from neurobiology. This information may be useful as a resourcelater in the book and is offered here as an introductory frame of ref -
erence.
The Organization of the Brain
The brain is a complex system of interconnected parts. The “lower
structures” include those circuits of the brainstem deep within theskull that mediate basic elements of energy flow, such as states ofarousal and alertness and the physiological state of the body (tem-perature, respiration, heart rate). At the top of the brainstem is thethalamus, an area that serves as a gateway for incoming sensoryinformation and has extensive connections to other regions of thebrain, including the neocortex, just above it. As we shall see, one the-ory considers the activity of the thalamocortical circuit to be a cen -
tral process for the mediation of conscious experience. The “higher
structures,” such as the neocortex at the top of the brain, mediate“more complex” information-processing functions such as percep -
tion, thinking, and reasoning. These areas are considered to be the
most evolutionarily “advanced” in humans and mediate the complexperceptual and abstract representations that constitute our associa -
tional thought processes. The centrally located “limbic system”—
including the regions called the orbitofrontal cortex, anterior cing -
ulate, and amygdala—plays a central role in coordinating the activity
of higher and lower brain structures. The limbic regions are thoughtto mediate emotion, motivation, and goal-directed behavior. Limbicstructures permit the integration of a wide range of basic mental pro -
cesses, such as the appraisal of meaning, the processing of social
experience (called “social cognition”), and the regulation of emotion.This region also houses the medial temporal lobe (toward the mid -10 THE DEVELOPING MIND

dle, just to the sides of the temples), including the hippocampus,
which is thought to play a central role in consciously accessibleforms of memory. The brain as a whole functions as an intercon -
nected and integrating system of subsystems. Although each element
contributes to the functioning of the whole, regions such as thelimbic system, with extensive input and output pathways linkingwidely distributed areas in the brain, may be primarily responsiblefor integrating brain activity. When we look to understand how themind develops, we need to examine how the brain comes to regulateits own processes. Such self-regulation appears to be carried out inlarge part by these limbic regions.
The limbic and lower regions of the brain also house the hypo -
thalamus and the pituitary, which are responsible for physiological
homeostasis, or bodily equilibrium, established by way of neuro -
endocrine activity (neuronal firing and hormonal release). Stress is
often responded to by the “hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenocortical(HPA) axis,” and this system can be adversely affected by trauma.This neuroendocrine axis, along with the autonomic nervous system(regulating such things as heart rate and respiration) and theneuroimmune system (regulating the body’s immunological defensesystem) are ways in which the function of the brain and body areintricately intertwined.
To gain a visual grasp of some of this brain structure, it may be
helpful to use a readily available, three-dimensional model that willenable you to have neuroanatomy in the palm of your hand, so tospeak. If you make a fist with your thumb bent toward the center ofyour palm and your fingers curled around it and resting on the lowerpart of your hand, you’ll have a model of the brain: Your lower armrepresents the location of the spinal cord inside the backbone andyour wrist is at the base of the skull; the various parts of your handrepresent the three major regions we’ve discussed above—lower,limbic, and neocortical areas. Looking directly at your fist from thepalmar side, the orbits of the eyes would emerge around the areas ofthe fingernails of your third and fourth fingers. The ears wouldextend from either side of your fist. Your fingers represent the neo -
cortex: Facing you are its frontal lobes; at the top are the neocortical
areas that mediate motor control and somatosensory representations;to the sides and back of your hand are the posterior parts that medi -
ate perceptual processing. The lower parts of the brain are repre -
sented by the midline portion of your lower palm. Just below your
knuckles, deep inside your fist where the end of your thumb rests, isIntroduction 11

the limbic system. Most of the brain is split into the left and right
hemispheres, which are connected with bands of tissue called thecorpus callosum and the anterior commissures, thought to serve asdirect sources of information transfer between the two sides of thebrain. The cerebellum, which would be located at the back of yourhand near its connection to your wrist, may also indirectly transferinformation across the division that separates the two halves of thebrain. The cerebellum itself may carry out a number of informationaland integrating processes.
The areas of your fist jutting out from the front of your palm
are the frontal lobes. The very front of this anterior region is calledthe prefrontal cortex, an area we will be exploring throughout thebook. We will examine two important aspects of this frontalneocortical region: the ventral medial (also known as the orbito -
frontal cortex, the term we shall use in this book) and the lateral
prefrontal cortex. The lateral prefrontal cortex rests to the sides (thus“lateral”) and is represented by your index finger on one side andyour fifth finger on the other. The lateral prefrontal cortex is thoughtto play a major role in working memory and the focusing of con-scious attention. On your fist model, the orbitofrontal area lies, asyou may have guessed, just behind and above the orbits of the eyes,especially where your last knuckles bend and the tips of your fingerspush inward toward your palm. Notice that in this position theorbitofrontal region is adjacent to a number of areas from which itreceives and to which it sends pathways carrying information: thedeeper structures of the brain that process sensory and bodily data,the limbic system itself, and the neocortex just above it. In this man -
ner, the orbitofrontal region can be seen, in fact, as the uppermost
part of the limbic system as well as a part of the frontal lobes of theneocortex. Some call this area a part of the “paralimbic” cortex.This three-dimensional model thus gives you a direct experiential/visual example of neural interconnections and the relevance of anat -
omy for coordinated function.
The brain is highly interconnected, and controversy exists in
academic circles about how distinct these regions actually are inanatomy and function.
6The notion of a limbic “system,” for exam -
ple, has been challenged, in that defining its limits (where it starts
and where it ends) has been scientifically difficult. Nevertheless, thelimbic regions appear to utilize specific neurotransmitters, to havehighly interconnected circuitry, to carry out complementary func -
tions, and to have similarities in their evolutionary history. For12 THE DEVELOPING MIND

example, the orbitofrontal cortex, sitting at the top of the limbic sys -
tem and anatomically connected to a wide array of areas in the neo -
cortex and the deeper structures of the brain, carries out a vital role
in the coordination of the activity from all three regions.7As we shall
see, recent studies from neuroscience suggest that this orbitofrontalregion may play a major role in many of the integrating processes wewill be examining, such as memory, emotion, and attachment.
The brain has an estimated one hundred billion neurons, which
are collectively over two million miles long. Each neuron has anaverage of ten thousand connections that directly link itself to otherneurons.
8Thus there are thought to be about one million billion of
these connections, making it “the most complex structure, natural orartificial, on earth.”
9A neuron sends an electrical impulse down its
long axons; this releases a neurotransmitter at the space at the end,called a “synapse,” which then excites or inhibits the downstreamneuron. A synapse is the connection that functionally links neuronsto one another. Because of the spider-web-like interconnections, acti-vation of one neuron can influence an average of ten thousand neu-rons at the receiving ends! The number of possible “on–off” patternsof neuronal firing is immense, estimated as a staggering ten times tenone million times (ten to the millionth power). The brain is obviouslycapable of an imponderably huge variety of activity; the fact that it isoften organized and functional is quite an accomplishment!
Brain Development
The activation of neural pathways directly influences the way con -
nections are made within the brain. Though experience shapes the
activity of the brain and the strength of neuronal connectionsthroughout life, experience early in life may be especially crucial inorganizing the way the basic structures of the brain develop. Forexample, traumatic experiences at the beginning of life may havemore profound effects on the “deeper” structures of the brain, whichare responsible for basic regulatory capacities and enable the mind torespond later to stress. Thus we see that abused children have ele -
vated baseline and reactive stress hormone levels. More common,
everyday experiences also shape brain structure. The brain’s develop -
ment is an “experience-dependent” process, in which experience acti -
vates certain pathways in the brain, strengthening existing connec -
tions and creating new ones. Lack of experience can lead to cell
death in a process called “pruning.” This is sometimes called a “use-Introduction 13

it-or-lose-it” principle of brain development. An infant is born with a
genetically programmed excess in neurons, and the postnatal estab -
lishment of synaptic connections is determined by both genes and
experience. Genes contain the information for the general organiza -
tion of the brain’s structure, but experience determines which genes
become expressed, how, and when. The expression of genes leads tothe production of proteins that enable neuronal growth and the for -
mation of new synapses. Experience—the activation of specific neu -
ral pathways—therefore directly shapes gene expression and leads to
the maintenance, creation, and strengthening of the connections thatform the neural substrate of the mind. Early in life, interpersonalrelationships are a primary source of the experience that shapes howgenes express themselves within the brain.
At birth, the infant’s brain is the most undifferentiated organ in
the body. Genes and early experience shape the way neurons connectto one another and thus form the specialized circuits that give rise tomental processes. In this way, experiences early in life have a tremen-dously important impact on the developing mind. The differentiationof circuits within the brain involves a number of processes including(1) the growth of axons into local and widely distributed regions; (2)the establishment of new and more extensive synaptic connectionsbetween neurons; (3) the growth of myelin along the lengths of neu-rons, which increases the speed of nerve conduction and thus “func-tionally” enhances the linkage among synaptically connected nervecells; (4) the modification of receptor density and sensitivity at thepostsynaptic “receiving” cell making connections more efficient; and(5) the balance of all of these factors with the dying away or pruningof neurons and synapses resulting from disuse or toxic conditionssuch as chronic stress. In experimental animals, enriched environ -
ments have been shown to lead to increased density of synaptic con -
nections and especially to an increased number of neurons and actual
volume of the hippocampus, a region important for learning andmemory.
10Experiences lead to an increased activity of neurons,
which enhances the creation of new synaptic connections. This expe -
rience-dependent brain growth and differentiation is thus referred to
as an “activity-dependent” process.
Interpersonal experiences continue to influence how our minds
function throughout life, but the major structures—especially thosethat are responsible for self-regulation—appear to be formed in theearly years. It is for this reason that we will look closely at the earlyyears of life to understand the ways in which the mind develops and14 THE DEVELOPING MIND

comes to regulate its own processes. An open question in neurobiolo -
gy is how “plastic,” or open to further development, the brain
remains throughout the lifespan. We can look toward the lessonsfrom studies of early interpersonal experience to try to understandthe ways in which relationships may continue to foster the develop -
ment of the mind throughout life.
Information Processing and Neurobiology
From an information-processing perspective, brain anatomy and neu -
ral circuit functioning can be understood as follows. Signals from the
deep structures representing physiological data from the body arereceived and processed by the centrally located limbic structures.More elaborately processed data from the activities of the limbic sys -
tem itself are integrated by limbic regions, including the orbitofrontal
cortex and anterior cingulate. These areas send emotional andsomatosensory input to the neocortex, which also processes percep-tual representations from the sensory cortices, conceptual from theassociational cortices, and linguistic representations from the lan-guage-processing centers. The information-processing task of inte-grating regions such as the associational cortices and orbitofrontalcortex is to take in the different neural “codes,” coordinate the infor-mation contained within these signals, and “translate” them intotransformed neural activity, which then is sent as output to the vari-ous regions. Such neural translation of the various forms of represen-tations allows for information to be both processed and then com -
municated in different codes to the relevant regions. This translation
process allows for a type of neural integration of complex informa -
tion within the mind.
An analogy is this: We can transmit an electronic mail message
with a file containing the twenty-six letters of the alphabet, spacing,and a handful of punctuation marks. With electrical flow throughwires in a pattern of impulses, we can send a detailed written note.Through the same wires, we can send an entire photograph or even avideo. Though the message contains different information (note,photo, video), the fundamental form in which the data is transmittedis identical—electrical impulses flowing as patterns of energy througha wire. The information contained within the different messages var -
ies in its patterns and its complexity. Without the proper receiving
device to translate these electrical impulses into words, pictures, orvideo, the complex representation has no meaning.Introduction 15

The same is true with the brain. Neural activity is the fundamen -
tal form in which information is transmitted. The sending area is
capable of transmitting a certain kind of information as neuralcodes. The receiving circuits or systems must be capable of process -
ing such signals for them to have any meaning. The brain is geneti -
cally programmed to be able to differentiate its regions, which carry
different forms of information. These forms vary in pattern and com -
plexity from the most “simple” signals of the deeper structures (such
as heart rate) to the more complex ones of the neocortex (such asideas about freedom or about the mind itself). Experience not onlyprovides the input that serves to activate (give the information to)these regions; it is necessary for the proper development of the brainitself. Experience-dependent maturation is a part of even the basicsensory systems of our brains. The brain must “use it or lose it” inmany cases of brain specialization. For example, studies in animalsreveal that the lack of exposure to certain types of visual informa-tion, such as vertical lines, during a critical period early in life leadsto loss of the capacity for perceiving such lines later in life. Specificforms of experience are necessary for the normal development ofinformation-processing circuits in the visual cortex.
11The same pro-
cess may occur for other systems in the brain, such as the attachmentsystem. Children who have had no experience with an attachmentfigure (not merely suboptimal attachment, but a lack of attachment)for the first several years of life may suffer a significant loss of thecapacity to establish intimate interpersonal relationships later on.
12
In this way, we can reexamine one of our initial questions: How
does experience shape the mind? A general principle can be proposedhere: Experiences can shape not only what information enters the
mind, but the way in which the mind develops the ability to processthat information. How this occurs can be seen as the modification of
the actual circuits of the brain responsible for processing that partic -
ular type of information. Experience creates representations, as well
as stimulating the capacity for specific forms of information process -
ing.
The Brain as a System
At the most basic level, the brain can be considered as a living sys -
tem that is open and dynamic. It is an integrated collection of com -
ponent subsystems that interact together in a patterned and changing
way to create an irreducible quality of the system as a whole.13A liv-
ing system must be open to the influences of the environment in16 THE DEVELOPING MIND

order to survive, and the brain is no exception. The system of the
brain becomes functionally linked to other systems, especially toother brains. The brain is also dynamic, meaning that it is forever ina state of change. An open, dynamic system is one that is in contin -
ual emergence with a changing environment and the changing state
of its own activity.
Furthermore, the brain is a complex system, meaning that there
are multiple layers of component parts capable of chaotic behavior.
14
These parts can be conceptualized at various levels of analysis, andinclude the single neuron and its sending and receiving functions;neuronal groups; circuits; systems; regions; hemispheres; and thewhole brain. The basic components, the neurons, are the simplest. Aswe move up the levels of components, the units become more andmore elaborate. Some authors use the terms “lower-order” to referto the basic level of organizational unit and “higher-order” to referto the more intricate level of organization. For the most part, eachsubsystem can be considered to have both lower and higher orders ofsystems with which it relates. For example, the activity of the visualcortex is made up of the lower-level input from the eyes, but itselfcontributes to the higher-level processing of the entire perceptual sys-tem.
15
From the point of view of the brain as an open system, each
region of the brain may take in unique input from outside of itself.The deeper structures of the brain receive sensory input from thebody and from the external world; the limbic system receives inputfrom the deeper structures and from the neocortex; and the neocor -
tex receives data from the limbic system itself. Neuroanatomic stud -
ies reveal that the neocortical regions are also intricately interwoven
with the “lower” levels of the system, and thus our “higher think -
ing” is actually directly dependent upon activity of the entire brain.
The regions coordinating the state of activation of the subcom -
ponents of the brain, however, are not in the “most evolved,” higher-
level neocortex. For this reason, the limbic system is more effective inthe regulation of the body and emotions than the “higher” neocor -
tex. This finding also demonstrates how emotions, generated and
regulated by the activity of the limbic system, are integral parts ofour neocortically derived “rational thoughts” as well as the overallfunctioning of our minds.
16
These issues also suggest that specific circuits within the brain
may function as somewhat distinct “subsystems” that create theirown predominant states of processing. For example, the left andright sides of the brain have distinct circuits that become predomi -Introduction 17

nant early in life, even in the embryo. Each of these pathways has its
dominant neurotransmitters and involves distinct evaluative compo -
nents that serve to direct each hemisphere to process information in
distinct manners. How each hemisphere is activated will directlyshape our subjective sensations and the ways in which we communi -
cate with others.
Genes and Experience
In an era when science is enabling us to understand human experi -
ence in new ways, it is important to examine the common debate
about how much of development and personality can be attributedto “nature” or genetics, as opposed to “nurture” or experience. Mis -
interpretations of genetic studies have lead to beliefs such as “What
parents do has no effect on their children’s development.” Althoughit is certainly true that temperament and other constitutional vari-ables play a huge, and perhaps previously underrecognized, role inchild development,
17riding the swing of the “What shapes develop-
ment?” pendulum to either the genetics end or the experience endcan lead to erroneous conclusions.
18
A wide range of studies19has in fact now clarified that develop-
ment is a product of the effect of experience on the unfolding ofgenetic potential. Genes encode the information for how neurons areto grow, make connections with each other, and die back as the brainattains differentiation of its circuitry. These processes are geneticallypreprogrammed and experience-dependent. Genes have two major
functions.
20First, they act as “templates” for information that is to
be passed on to the next generation; second, they have a “transcrip -
tion” function based on the information encoded within their DNA,
which determines which proteins will be synthesized. Transcription isdirectly influenced by experience. Experience determines when genesexpress themselves via the process of protein synthesis. For the brain,this means that experience directly influences how neurons will con -
nect to one another—creating new synaptic connections, altering
their strengths, and allowing others to die away.
21
Genes do not act in isolation from experience. Genes and experi -
ence interact in such a way that certain biological tendencies can cre -
ate characteristic experiences. For example, certain temperaments
may produce characteristic parental responses.22These responses in
turn shape the way in which neuronal growth, interconnections, andpruning (dying back) occur. Embracing this approach to the nature–nurture issue can allow us to move on scientifically solid grounds18 THE DEVELOPING MIND

toward understanding human development and the growth of the
mind. The question isn’t “Is it heredity orexperience?”, but “How
do heredity andexperience interact in the development of an individ -
ual?”
Allan Schore addresses the issue of how child–caregiver interac -
tions shape the development of the brain:
In such transactions the primary caregiver is providing experiences
which shape genetic potential by acting as a psychobiological regu -
lator (or dysregulator) of hormones that directly influence gene
transcription. This mechanism mediates a process by whichpsychoneuroendocrinological changes during critical periods initi -
ate permanent effects at the genomic level. The final developmen -
tal outcome of early endocrine–gene interactions is expressed in
the imprinting of evolving brain circuitry.
23
The development of the mind has been described as having
“recursive” features.24That is, what an individual’s mind presents to
the world can reinforce the very things that are presented. A typicalenvironmental/parental response to a child’s behavioral output mayreinforce that behavior. Therefore, the child plays a part in shapingthe experiences to which the child’s mind must adapt. In this way,behavior itself alters genetic expression, which then creates behavior.In the end, changes in the organization of brain function, emotionalregulation, and long-term memory are mediated by alterations inneural structure. These structural changes are due to the activationor deactivation of genes encoding information for protein synthesis.Experience, gene expression, mental activity, behavior, and continuedinteractions with the environment (experience) are tightly linked in atransactional set of processes.
25Such is the recursive nature of devel -
opment and the way in which nature and nurture, genes and experi -
ence, are inextricably part of the same process.
Genetic studies of behavior commonly note that fifty percent of
each of the personality features measured is attributable to heredity.The majority of the other half of the variability is thought to be dueto “nonshared” aspects of the environment, such as school experi -
ences and peer relationships.
26But siblings—including even identical
twins, who are raised by the same parents at the same time—actuallyhave a “nonshared” environment, in that parental behavior is notidentical for each child.
27The recursive quality of mental develop -
ment magnifies initial individual differences and creates a challenge
to the sometimes held opinion that growing up in the same family isIntroduction 19

a shared (statistically identical) experience. This reminds us that each
individual’s history reflects an inseparable blend of how the environ -
ment, random events, and the person’s temperament all contribute to
the creation of experiences in which adaptation and learning recur -
sively shape the development of the mind.
The importance of “epigenetic factors”—the ways in which
experience directly influences how genes are expressed—is alsorevealed in the study of the inheritance of certain psychiatric disor -
ders, such as schizophrenia.
28In identical twins, who share all of
their genetic information, there is less than a fifty percent concor -
dance in the behavioral expression of the illness. This implies that
many factors determine how a “genotype” (genetic template orinformation) becomes expressed as a “phenotype” (genetic transcrip -
tion function leading to protein synthesis and external manifestation
as physical or behavioral features).
For the growing brain of a young child, the social world supplies
the most important experiences influencing the expression of genes,which determines how neurons connect to one another in creatingthe neuronal pathways which give rise to mental activity. The func-tion of these pathways is determined by their structure; thus alter-ations in genetic expression change brain structure and shape thedeveloping mind. The functioning of the mind—derived from neuralactivity—in turn alters the physiological environment of the brain,and thus itself can produce changes in gene expression. This isclearly seen in the production of corticosteroids as a response tostress, which directly influences gene function.
29In children with shy
temperaments, for example, there is a huge physiological response toeven mild environmental changes.
30Such individuals create their own
internal world of stress responses that heighten their brains’ reactiv -
ity to novelty.31Likewise, a child traumatized early in life will have
an alteration in physiological response, such that small stressors leadto large hormonal responses.
32Thus both constitutional and exper -
ientially “acquired” reactivity can lead to further physiological fea -
tures that maintain the hypervigilant response over time. Jerome
Kagan and his colleagues have demonstrated that parenting behaviormakes a large difference for the trajectory of development.
33In their
research, those parents who supportively encouraged their shy chil -
dren to explore new situations enabled the children to develop more
outgoing behaviors than those parents who did not help their chil -
dren with their fears. These and other intervention studies clearly
demonstrate that parenting has a direct effect on developmental out -20 THE DEVELOPING MIND

come, even in the face of significant inherited features of physiologi -
cal reactivity.34Throughout the book we will return to discussions of
shy and traumatized children as examples of the interactions betweenconstitutional and experiential variables in development.
Interpersonal Experience and the Brain
In this book, I am proposing that the mind develops at the interfaceof neurophysiological processes and interpersonal relationships. Re -
lationship experiences have a dominant influence on the brain
because the circuits responsible for social perception are the same asor tightly linked to those that integrate the important functions con -
trolling the creation of meaning, the regulation of bodily states, the
modulation of emotion, the organization of memory, and the capac -
ity for interpersonal communication. Interpersonal experience thus
plays a special organizing role in determining the development ofbrain structure early in life and the ongoing emergence of brain func-tion throughout the lifespan.
One fundamental finding relevant for developing this “interper-
sonal neurobiology” of the mind comes from numerous studiesacross a wide variety of cultures: Attachment is based on collabora-tive communication. Secure attachment involves contingent commu-nication, in which the signals of one person are directly responded toby the other. Sounds simple. But why is this type of reciprocal com-munication so important? Why doesn’t it happen in all families?During early development, a parent and child “tune in” to eachother’s feelings and intentions in a dance of connection that estab -
lishes the earliest form of communication. Mary Ainsworth’s early
studies suggest that healthy, secure attachment requires that the care -
giver have the capacity to perceive and respond to the child’s mental
state.
35
We will review recent findings from neuroscience that can help
us to understand the mechanisms underlying how these early recipro -
cal communication experiences are remembered and how they allow
a child’s brain to develop a balanced capacity to regulate emotions,to feel connected to other people, to establish an autobiographicalstory, and to move out into the world with a sense of vitality. Thecapacity to reflect on mental states, both of the self and of others,emerges from within attachment relationships that foster such pro -
cesses.
36These patterns of communication literally shape the struc -
ture of the child’s developing brain. These important early interper -Introduction 21

sonal experiences are encoded within various forms of memory. But
the need for this type of communication and connection may not endwith childhood. As adults, we need not only to be understood andcared about, but to have another individual simultaneously experi -
ence a state of mind similar to our own. With this shared, collabora -
tive experience, life can be filled with an integrating sense of connec -
tion and meaning.22 THE DEVELOPING MIND

THE DEVELOPING MINDMemory
CHAPTER 2
/fl2rt
Memory
A GENERAL DEFINITION OF MEMORY
We often think of “memory” as what we can consciously recall
about what happened in the past. If you think about what you didlast weekend or last year, for example, you may begin to visualizesome event or interaction with other people. How are experiencesremembered? How does recollection actually happen? In this chapter,we explore answers to these questions by looking at what is knownabout the mechanisms of memory. Although people have been fasci-nated with memory for thousands of years of recorded history,reflecting on past experiences and telling the stories of major events,it is only recently that we have been able to understand in a scientificway what some of the basic elements of memory actually are.
1
As we explore the remembering mind, try to keep an eye on
your everyday basic assumptions about memory. You may be sur -
prised to find that many of them are helpful, but that some of them
may be in need of revision. Common misconceptions about memoryinclude the following: that we are always aware of what we haveexperienced; that when we remember something, we have the feelingof recollection; and that the mind is somehow able to make a sort ofphotograph of experiences, which is stored without further modifica -
tion. Recollection is thus often seen as the presentation of some bits
of information, independent of elements present at the time of recallor of bias by prior experiences. As we’ll see, the structure of memoryis quite complex and sensitive to both external and internal factorsas it constructs the past, the present, and the anticipated future.
2
23

Memory is more than what we can consciously recall about
events from the past. A broader definition is that memory is the way
past events affect future function. Memory is thus the way the brain
is affected by experience and then subsequently alters its futureresponses. In this view, the brain experiences the world and encodesthis interaction in a manner that alters future ways of responding.What we shall soon see is that this definition of memory allows us tounderstand how past events can directly shape how and what welearn, even though we may have no conscious recollection of thoseevents. Our earliest experiences shape our ways of behaving, includ -
ing patterns of relating to others, without our ability to recall con -
sciously when these first learning experiences occurred.
As discussed in Chapter 1, the brain is composed of spider-web-
like neural networks capable of firing in a myriad of patterns, calleda “neural net profile.”
3Scientists studying the behavior of such net -
works have found that the structure of the neural net allows it tolearn through an encoding process that initially activates a specific
set of associated neuronal firing patterns, which are distributedthroughout the brain.
4Writers who explore this phenomenon
describe what has been called “connectionist theory” and “paralleldistributed processing.” The essential feature of these studies is thatthe connection of neurons in an intricate network, the structure ofthe brain, allows for learning to occur.
5It is the firing of the compo-
nents of the network, the circuits of neurons, that alters the probabil-ities of certain patterns’ firing in the future. If a certain pattern hasbeen stimulated in the past, the probability of activating a similarprofile in the future is enhanced. If the pattern is fired repeatedly, theprobability of future activation is further increased. The increasedprobability is created by changes in the synaptic connections withinthe network of neurons. Changes at the level of the cell membranethus alter the firing probability of specific combinations of neurons.
6
The process of “long-term potentiation” has been described as oneway in which such alteration of connection strengths among neuronsoccurs.
7The specific pattern of firing, the energy contained within a
certain neural net profile of activated neurons, contains within it“information.” Thus the network learns from its past experiences.The increased probability of firing a similar pattern is how the net -
work “remembers.” Information is encoded and retrieved through
the synaptic changes that direct the flow of energy through the neu -
ral system, the brain.
In a direct way, experience shapes the structure of the brain. As
we’ve seen in Chapter 1, this general process is called “experience-24 THE DEVELOPING MIND

dependent” brain development and refers to the general processes by
which neuronal connections are maintained, strengthened, or createdduring experience. As we continue to learn and remember through -
out life, our brains and our minds can be seen as having ongoing
development across the lifespan. The infant brain has an overabun -
dance of neurons with relatively few synaptic connections at birth,
compared to the highly differentiated and interconnected set of con -
nections that will be established in the first few years of life. Experi -
ence and genetic information will determine to a large extent how
those connections are established. Memory utilizes the processes bywhich chemical alterations strengthen associations among neuronsfor short-term encoding and actually activate the genetic machineryrequired for the establishment of new synaptic connections for long-term memory storage.
As Milner, Squire, and Kandel have noted, “recent work on
plasticity in the sensory cortices has introduced the idea that thestructure of the brain, even in sensory cortex, is unique to each indi-vidual and dependent on each individual’s experiential history.”
8
Thus the structure and function of the brain are shaped by experi-ence. Developmental and memory processes may actually be basedon similar neural and molecular mechanisms underlying synapse for-mation.
9These changes in synaptic connection alter the ways in
which the brain functions. What we usually think of as “memory”refers to the way in which events can influence the brain in a waythat allows for future activity to be altered in a specific manner. Aswe’ll see, the brain has a wide array of direct mechanisms by whichit “remembers” experience.
How we recall the past will be determined by which components
of the massive network of the brain are activated in the future. Forexample, if you see the Eiffel Tower on a trip to Paris, your visualsystem (and other parts of your brain) will respond to the sight withactivation of its circuitry, creating a representation or image of theTower within your mind. This is called “encoding” a memory. Thenext stage is the “storage” of memory, which is the increased proba -
bility that a similar profile will be activated again in the future. Note
that there is no “storage closet” in the brain in which something isplaced and then taken out when needed. Memory storage is the
change in probability of activating a particular neural network pat -
tern in the future. Your brain will have the potential to reactivate the
visual circuitry, the neural net profile, similar to the initial encoding.Memory, then, is a process which is based on altering the probabili -
ties of neuronal firing. “Retrieval” is the actual activation of thatMemory 25

potential neural net profile, which resembles—but is not identical
with—the profile activated in the past. Thus, when you intentionallytry to recall the Eiffel Tower, you may experience an internal visualimage of the structure, as well as other aspects of your Paris journey.
The neural net of the brain can activate a set of anatomically
and chronologically associated firings in response to the environ -
ment. This profile is encoded, stored, and retrieved on the basis of a
simple axiom defined by Donald Hebb: Neurons which fire togetherat one time will tend to fire together in the future.
10Another way of
phrasing Hebb’s law is this: Neurons that fire together wire together.As Donald Hebb pointed out, in 1949, “The general idea is an oldone, that any two cells or systems of cells that are repeatedly activeat the same time will tend to become ‘associated,’ so that activity inone facilitates activity in the other.”
11This neural association that
functionally links the activity of neurons is now understood toinvolve transient metabolic changes for short-term memory and morestable structural changes for long-term memory storage. The princi-ple of linkage involves both anatomic and temporal association ofneuronal activity. As we’ll see, this temporospatial integration offunction at the neural level means that it is fundamentally throughmemory that the complex neural network creates anatomically dis-tributed and functionally clustered assemblies of activation acrosstime. The alteration of synaptic connections, or “synaptic strengths,”either by the creation of new connections or the modification ofexisting ones (for example, by way of changes in neurotransmitterrelease or receptor sensitivity) directly changes the probabilities ofneuronal firing. This associational process is called Hebb’s Axiom, inhonor of his foresight into these basic processes. This is the essenceof how the neural net remembers.
Let’s continue with the example of the Eiffel Tower. You may be
able—if you’ve actually seen the Tower or a picture of it—to “see”an image of the Tower in your mind’s eye. What does this actuallymean? Recent brain studies suggest that, given the task to visualizean object, the parts of your brain responsible for visual processingwill become active.
12What is believed to be occurring is that a neural
net profile similar to the one activated at the time you actually sawthe object is now being reactivated in the same parts of the brain.This is called a “visual representation.” Thus the mind is able to gen -
erate a pattern of neural firing at the time of seeing with your eyes,
as well as to generate an image independently in the process of imag -
ining with your mind. Representations come in many forms, includ -26 THE DEVELOPING MIND

ing perceptual ones (like visualizing the Eiffel Tower), semantic ones
(like seeing the words “Eiffel Tower” and knowing their meaning),and multiple sensory ones (such as having a feeling of hungerbecause when you were at the Tower you had to wait for a picnic,and now your mind is bringing up the associated sensation of hun -
ger).
13
Our memories are based on the binding together of various
aspects of these neuronal activation patterns. These “associationallinkages” make it more likely that items will be activated simulta -
neously during the retrieval process. Representations are linked
together via a wide range of internal mental processes unique to eachindividual. Brain imaging studies suggest that the representation ofan experience may be stored in particular regions of the brain, suchas the perceptual areas in the posterior part of the neocortex (at theback of the head), which initially were activated in response to theexperience. Encoding and retrieval processes may be mediated viaseparate regions (such as the orbitofrontal cortex, just in back of andabove the eyes).
14Thus specific regions may actively mediate a pro-
cess whereby neural activation patterns (representations) are acti-vated and then bound together in the act of encoding or during rec-ollection.
15What are stored are the probabilities of neurons’ firing in
a specific pattern—not actual “things.” Your recollection of the EiffelTower will differ from mine for many reasons: the unique aspects ofseveral factors such as the nature of our experiences, the ways inwhich our brains create representations, and the manner in whichthe encoding and retrieval process may function. For example, if youwere bitten by a dog during that Parisian picnic, you may begin tofeel a sense of fear or even pain (emotional and bodily representa -
tions, respectively) when you think of the Tower. If you loved France,
your sensory representations may be quite different than they wouldbe if you disliked France when you first visited. How you feel at thetime you are remembering will also profoundly influence which ele -
ments become associated with this complexly bound representation
during retrieval.
In memory research, the initial impact of an experience on the
brain has been called an “engram.”
16If you visited the Eiffel Tower
with a friend and were talking about existential philosophy andImpressionist paintings as you were having your picnic, your engrammight include the various levels of experience: semantic (factual—something about philosophy or art or knowledge about the Tower),autobiographical (your sense of yourself at that time in your life),Memory 27

somatic (what your body felt like at the time), perceptual (what
things looked like, how they smelled), emotional (your mood at thetime), and behavioral (what you were doing with your body). Youroriginal Eiffel Tower engram would include linkages connecting eachof these forms of representations. Scientists have named the first twotypes of consciously accessible memory “explicit” or “declarative”memory. The other forms of memory are quite distinct and aregrouped together as “implicit” or “nondeclarative” memory. Re -
searchers have used various names such as “early” versus “late,”
“nondeclarative” versus “declarative,” “procedural” versus “seman -
tic/episodic,” and “implicit” versus “explicit.”
17For the purposes of
this book, the terms “implicit” and “explicit” are used to identifythese functionally distinct systems.
Some authors use the notion of “trace theory” to describe the
encoding, storage, and retrieval processes of memory. In this view,your engram or memory trace has both a “gist” (the general notionthat you were in France at the Tower) and specific details.
18With
time, the details of an experience may begin to fade away andbecome less tightly bound together. The gist, however, may remaineasily accessible for retrieval and quite accurate. When we try toretrieve an “original memory,” in fact, we may be calling up the gistat first (“I was at the Eiffel Tower when I was in my early twenties”)and then later trying to reconstruct the details. This reconstructionprocess may be profoundly influenced by the present environment,the questioning context itself, and other factors, such as current emo-tions and our perception of the expectations of those listening to theresponse. Memory is not a static thing, but an active set of processes.Even the most “concrete” experiences, such as recalling an architec -
tural structure, are actually dynamic representational processes.
Remembering is not merely the reactivation of an old engram; it is
the construction of a new neural net profile with features of the oldengram and elements of memory from other experiences, as well asinfluences from the present state of mind.
IMPLICIT MEMORY: MENTAL MODELS,
BEHAVIORS, IMAGES, AND EMOTIONS
From the first days of life, infants perceive the environment around
them. Research has shown that infants are able to demonstrate recallfor experiences in the form of behavioral, perceptual, and emotional28 THE DEVELOPING MIND

learning.19Examples of these forms of memory are numerous and
demonstrate how active infants are in perceiving and learning abouttheir environment. Babies can turn their heads to a learned stimulus.They can perceive visual patterns and can even relate these to otherperceptual modalities, such as touch or sound. If they become fright -
ened by a loud noise associated with a particular toy, they will get
upset when shown that toy in the future. These forms of memory arecalled “implicit.” They are available early in life and, when retrieved,are not thought to carry with them the internal sensation that some -
thing is being recalled. An infant who sees that toy just gets upset;
the infant doesn’t sense, “Oh, yes, I remember that toy. It made aloud noise before. Perhaps it will make one again. Oh, no!” Instead,the neural net/Hebbian associations automatically link the visualinput of the toy with an internal emotional response of fear.
Implicit memory involves parts of the brain that do not require
conscious processing during encoding or retrieval.
20When implicit
memory is retrieved, the neural net profiles that are reactivatedinvolve circuits in the brain that are a fundamental part of our every-day experience of life: behaviors, emotions, and images. Theseimplicit elements form part of the foundation for our subjective senseof ourselves: We act, feel, and imagine without recognition of theinfluence of past experience on our present reality.
Implicit memory relies on brain structures that are intact at
birth and remain available to us throughout life. These structuresinclude the amygdala and other limbic regions for emotional mem-ory, the basal ganglia and motor cortex for behavioral memory,and the perceptual cortices for perceptual memory. Though re -
search has not explored somatosensory (bodily) memory as a part
of implicit processes, one could imagine that this form of nonver -
bal recall might meet the criteria for implicit memory and possibly
be mediated by the somatosensory cortex, the orbitofrontal cortex,and the anterior cingulate—regions responsible for bodily represen -
tations.
With repeated experiences, the infant’s brain—functioning with
its rapidly developing neural net/parallel processor—is able to detectsimilarities and differences across experiences. From these compara -
tive processes, the infant’s mind is able to make “summations” or
generalized representations from repeated experiences as encoded inthese areas of the brain. This is a fundamental aspect of learning.These generalizations form the basis of “mental models” or “sche -
mata,” which help the infant (in fact, each of us) to interpret presentMemory 29

experiences as well as to anticipate future ones. Mental models are
basic components of implicit memory. Our minds use mental models
of the world in order to assess a situation more rapidly and to deter -
mine what the next moment in time is most likely to offer.
The brain creates multimodal models—models that span percep -
tual modalities. For example, if infants are allowed to feel the shape
of a nipple with their mouths in a darkened room, they later will beable to pick out the familiar nipple from a visual display.
21Their
minds have created a mental image from touch, which then can beused to sense a familiar pattern by sight. The brain can also averageacross different experiences. Infants can be shown an array of facialimages and then later pick out the ones that are summations of thoseseen earlier. From the first days of life, the infant’s brain is capable ofcreating a multimodal model of the world. These capacities furthersuggest that the mind is capable from the very beginning of creatinggeneralizations from experience.
These mental models are derived from encounters with the
world. Mental models in turn help the mind to seek out familiarobjects or experiences and to know what to expect from the environ-ment. Deviations from the usual can be ascertained, and the worldbecomes a familiar and negotiable place to live. Studies of childrenand adults suggest that here-and-now perceptual biases are based onthese nonconscious mental models.
22For example, if you’ve seen
numerous city streets before, you may be more likely to see the nextone from a similar viewpoint, without examining subtle differencesin detail. On the other hand, if you have never been to a city before,you will see each street as unique “for what it is” rather than makingautomatic perceptual presumptions. The brain can be called an
“anticipation machine,” constantly scanning the environment andtrying to determine what will come next.
23Mental models of the
world are what allow our minds to carry out this vital functionwhich has enabled us as a species to survive. Prior experiences shapeour anticipatory models, and thus the term “prospective memory”has been used to describe how the mind attempts to “remember thefuture,” based on what has occurred in the past.
24Each moment, the
brain automatically tries to determine what is going on; it classifiesan experience by activating a mental model, which helps bias presentperceptions to allow for more rapid processing of the immediateenvironment. Readiness for response is enhanced by anticipating thenext moment in time—what the world may offer next and whatbehavior to initiate in response.30 THE DEVELOPING MIND

Let’s look at an example. If prior encounters with animals with
large teeth have shown that they present a danger, then the associa -
tion within the memory of such an animal will include a feeling of
fear. The next time we encounter such a beast, we will be motivatedby fear to run for safety. If we did not have the capacity to create amental model that establishes the generalization “Large-toothed ani -
mals are dangerous,” then encounters with a slightly different type of
beast might not prompt us to run. We would have to learn anewwith every experience. Mental models, the generalizations from pastexperiences, are the essence of learning. These models, derived fromthe past, shape our perceptual experience of the present and help usto anticipate and act in the future. As we’ll see, anticipating the
future may be a fundamental component of implicit memory, distinctfrom the capacity to plan for the future. The more complex and
deliberate aspect of planning may depend upon the explicit memoryprocesses discussed in the next sections.
Parenthetically, the procedure of asking how a mental process was
used adaptively in our evolutionary past is sometimes called “reverse-engineering the mind.”
25The brain, after all, is constructed by genetics,
by aspects of the physiological internal environment (such as nutrients,hormones, toxins, drugs, or lack of oxygen), and by experience. Thegenetic contribution to brain functions and mental processes can beseen through the eyes of the evolutionary biologist: Those functionsenhancing the probability that the genes would be replicated (passedon through the gametes [the eggs or sperm] in creating offspring) weremost likely to be passed on through the generations. In this way, thegenetic determination of mental processes may be in the direction ofadaptations to past environments, not necessarily to our current ones.For the mind, what this means is that processes such as memory, atten -
tion, perception, and emotional responses may be understood (at least
in part) by their past function in the evolutionary history of our species,as well as by how they are shaped by present conditions and earlierexperiences of the individual.
26
DEVELOPMENTAL IMPLICATIONS
OF IMPLICIT MEMORY
The following examples provide an introduction to some ideas about
attachment, which will be explored in greater detail in the next chap -
ter.27They are offered here to illustrate the ubiquitous role of implicitMemory 31

memory throughout the lifespan. (In these examples and throughout
the book, incidentally, I alternate between “she” and “he” as thethird-person singular pronoun, to avoid sexist usage.) An infant whohas a healthy, secure attachment has had the repeated experience ofnurturing, perceptive, sensitive, and predictable caregiving responsesfrom her mother, which have been encoded implicitly in her brain.She has developed a generalized representation of that relationship—a mental model of attachment—which helps her know what toexpect from her mother. Given that these repeated experiences havebeen predictable, and that when there have been disruptions inmother–infant communication the mother has been relatively quickand effective at repairing the ruptures, this fortunate infant has beenable to develop a secure, organized mental model of their emotionalrelationship. Her implicit memory anticipates that the future willcontinue to provide such contingent communication.
An infant with an insecure attachment may have experienced his
parents as less predictable, emotionally distant, or perhaps evenfrightening. These experiences, too, become encoded implicitly, andthe infant’s mind has a generalized representation of this relationshipthat can be filled with uncertainty, distance, or fear. With the stimu-lus cue of being alone with a parent who has been the source of con-fusion and terror, these implicit representations can become reacti-vated and create a very unpleasant, disorganizing, and frighteninginternal world for the infant. This state of mind, a part of his emo-tional memory, has been implicitly learned during the first year of hislife.
By a child’s first birthday, these repeated patterns of implicit
learning are deeply encoded in the brain. Indeed, attachment studiesat this time yield striking differences in infants’ behavior when theyare with each parent. An infant’s states of mind when she is with themother can affect her differently from those that are activated whenshe is with her father. As we’ll see in the next chapter, this is the ori -
gin of the differences that can be seen in the infant’s attachment to
the two parents. By eighteen months, the maturation of various partsof the child’s brain has allowed for the blossoming of her compre -
hension and expression of language. At about this time, frontal parts
of the brain are developing rapidly and enable her to have evocativememory, in which it is believed she is able to bring forward in hermind a sensory image of a parent in order to help soothe herself andregulate her emotional state.
28Infants are likely to be calmed by the
image of a parent with whom they have a secure attachment, and to32 THE DEVELOPING MIND

be anxious, distant, or fearful with a parent with whom they have an
insecure attachment.
The patterns of particular states of mind in an infant can be seen
as encoded as an implicit form of memory. Repeated experiences ofterror and fear can be engrained within the circuits of the brain asstates of mind. With chronic occurrence, these states can becomemore readily activated (retrieved) in the future, such that theybecome characteristic traits of the individual.
29In this way, our lives
can become shaped by reactivations of implicit memory, which lack asense that something is being recalled. We simply enter theseengrained states and experience them as the reality of our presentexperience.
Insights into the ways in which early experiences have shaped
the implicit memory system can aid in the understanding of variousaspects of human relationships. Being with a particular person canactivate distinct mental models that affect our perceptions, emotions,Memory 33
TABLE 1. Types and Characteristics of Memory
Forms of memory
Early, nondeclarative, procedural, implicit
versus
Late, declarative, episodic/semantic, explicit
Developmental biology of memory
Implicit processing systems (early memory): Present at birth.
Explicit processing systems (late memory):
Semantic: Develops initially by one to two years of age.Autobiographical: Progressive development with onset after second year of life.
Implicit memory
A form of memory devoid of the subjective internal experience of “recalling,”
of self, or of time. Involves mental models and “priming.”
Includes behavioral, emotional, perceptual, and perhaps somatosensory memory.Focal attention notrequired for encoding.
Is mediated via brain circuits involved in the initial encoding and independent
of the medial temporal lobe/hippocampus.
Explicit memory
A form of memory requiring conscious awareness for encoding and having
the subjective sense of recollection (and, if autobiographical, of self and time).
Includes semantic (factual) and episodic (autobiographical) memory.Focal attention needed for encoding.Hippocampal processing required for storage.Cortical consolidation makes selected events a part of permanent memory.

behaviors, and beliefs in response to this other person. The notion of
implicit memory’s influencing our experiences with others is one wayof understanding the complex feelings and perceptions arising withininterpersonal relationships. Each of us filters our interactions withothers through the lenses of mental models created from patterns ofexperiences in the past. These models can shift rapidly outside ofawareness, sometimes creating abrupt transitions in states of mindand interactions with others. In this way, “transference”—the activa -
tion of old mental models and states of mind from our relationships
with important figures in the past—happens all the time, both insideand outside the psychotherapy suite. Knowing about implicit mem -
ory allows us the opportunity to free ourselves from the prison of the
past.
EXPLICIT MEMORY: FACTS, EVENTS,
AND AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL CONSCIOUSNESS
By the second birthday, toddlers have developed new capacities: to
talk about their recollections of the day’s events, and to remembermore distant experiences from the past. These abilities reflect thematuration of the brain’s medial temporal lobe (which includes apart called the hippocampus) and orbitofrontal cortex; this matura-tion process allows them to have “explicit” memory.
30Explicit mem-
ory is what most people mean when they refer to the generic idea ofmemory. When explicit recollections are retrieved, they have theinternal sensation of “I am remembering.” Two forms of explicitmemory are “semantic” (factual) and “episodic” (autobiographicalor oneself in an episode in time). Table 1 provides an overview of thetypes and characteristics of memory.
The development of the unique aspects of explicit memory
involves a number of domains in a child’s experiencing. A sense ofsequencing, thought to be a function of the hippocampus as a “cog -
nitive mapper,” develops during the child’s second year of life.
31
Recalling the order in which events in the world occur allows the
child to develop a sense of time and the sequence of things. Childrencome to expect, with at times intense and passionate reactions todeviations, what typically comes first and what comes next in a givensituation. Associated with this hippocampal ability is the establish -
ment of a spatial representational map of the locations of things in
the world. Loss of hippocampal functioning in animals, for example,34 THE DEVELOPING MIND

leads to loss of memory for running a maze.32What is interesting in
this finding is the notion that this cognitive mapper is thus able tocreate a four-dimensional sense of the self in the world across time.The brain’s ability to create such a temporal and spatial representa -
tion is clearly of great survival value. Explicit memory plays the
important role of providing a sense of space and time, allowing peo -
ple to remember where things are and when they were there.
As children grow into their second year, they begin to develop a
more complex image of themselves in the world. This sense of selfhas been identified by studies examining how children respond toseeing themselves in the mirror with a red mark placed on theirfaces. They notice something different in their reflection, suggestingthat they have a mental image in their minds of what they usuallylook like. By eighteen months they are able to touch themselvesrather than the mirror in exploring the red mark. Taken together, thedevelopmental phase of the second year suggests that a child is devel-oping a sense of the physical world, of time and sequence, and of theself, all of which form the foundation of explicit autobiographicalmemory.
33Before this time, events in the child’s life may have been
remembered (“event memory”), but it is thought that these aresemantic recollections of experiences without an enriched sense ofself across time, which is the hallmark of autobiographical (episodic)recollection.
34
Wheeler, Stuss, and Tulving have summarized recent neuroimag-
ing studies, which suggest that memory for facts (semantic mem-ory)—including events—is functionally quite distinct from memoryof the self across time (episodic memory).
35Semantic memory allows
for propositional representations—symbols of external or internalfacts that can be declared with words or in graphic form and can beassessed as “true” or “false.” Such semantic knowledge has beencalled “noesis” and allows us to know about facts in the world. Incontrast, autobiographical or episodic memory requires a capacitytermed “autonoesis” (self-knowing) and appears to be dependentupon the development of frontal cortical regions of the brain. Theseregions undergo rapid experience-dependent development during thefirst few years of life (continuing possibly into adulthood) and arepostulated to mediate autonoetic consciousness. The ability of thehuman mind to carry out what Tulving and colleagues have termed“mental time travel”—to have a sense of recollection of the self at aparticular time in the past, awareness of the self in the lived present,and projections of the self into the imagined future—is the uniqueMemory 35

contribution of autonoetic consciousness.36By the middle of the third
year of life, a child has already begun to join caregivers in mutuallyconstructed tales woven from their real-life events and imagining.
37
The richness of self-knowledge and autobiographical narrativesappears to be mediated by the interpersonal dialogues in which care -
givers co-construct narratives about external events and the internal,
subjective experiences of the characters.
38In this way, we can hypoth -
esize that attachment experiences—that is, communication with par -
ents and other caregivers—may directly enhance a child’s capacity
for autonoetic consciousness. This can be proposed to be one reasonwhy shared communication about remembered events enhances rec -
ollection.
39The details of such a view will be explored in the next
chapter.
The encoding process for both forms of explicit memory (seman -
tic and episodic) appears to require focal, conscious, directed atten -
tion to activate the hippocampus.40As encoding occurs, stimuli are
placed initially in “sensory” memory, which lasts for about a quarterto half a second. This sensory “buffer” contains the initial neuralactivations of the perceptual system. Only selected items from thishuge immediate sensory process are then placed in “working” mem-ory, which lasts up to half a minute if there is no further rehearsal. Ifthe mind rehearses or refreshes the activity of these activated circuitsof working memory, then the items can be either maintained for lon-ger periods of time in this process (such as practicing a phone num-ber long enough to dial it repeatedly if the line is busy) or placed intolonger-term storage.
Working memory has been called the “chalkboard of the mind.”
It is the mental process involved when we say that we are “thinkingabout something”; it allows us to reflect upon items perceived in thepresent and recalled from the past.
41When we consciously think of a
problem or an event, working memory allows us to link togethervarious representations and manipulate them in our minds. Theproduct of such cognitive processing can then enter a more stablecomponent, “long-term” memory. In some individuals with disordersof attention, working memory appears to be unable to handle theamount of items for as long as the working memory of normal sub -
jects. Imaging studies have supported this clinical finding by identify -
ing abnormalities in the lateral prefrontal cortex, the site thought to
be a primary mediator of working memory.
42
Long-term explicit memory is thought to be the process by
which items are stored for extended periods of time beyond working36 THE DEVELOPING MIND

memory.43For example, recalling a close friend’s phone number
requires it to be placed in long-term storage. Remembering thephone number of a shop you need to call only once requires workingmemory to hold on to those digits just long enough to dial the num -
ber. After the call, the shop’s number vanishes from any form of per -
manent storage. If working memory persisted, we would be bom -
barded by irrelevant information from the past. Placing a needed
item into long-term memory allows us to recall important data.When we ask others to recall their experiences from the last month,we are in effect requesting them to activate a representational processthat has been “stored” as an increased probability of firing within aneural net. This is mediated by genetically activated structural alter -
ations in synaptic connections within the network. In contrast, work -
ing memory is thought to be independent of gene-activated protein
synthesis. It involves functional (not structural) alterations in synap -
tic strengths, such as increases in synaptic excitability that tempo-rarily enhance the probability of specific neuronal firing. Recollection
can be viewed as the actual activation of a potential or latent repre-sentation. The hippocampus is essential for both encoding items intoand retrieving them from long-term explicit memory. The linkage ofthis process to the circuits of the lateral prefrontal cortex is one viewof the mechanism for having working memory activate the structur-ally embedded elements of long-term memory, where they can beconsciously examined, manipulated, and reported to others.
44
Long-term memory does not last forever. For these items to
become a part of permanent explicit memory, a process called “corti -
cal consolidation” is thought to occur.45Though the mechanism has
not been elucidated thus far, some views suggest that cortical consoli -
dation requires a nonconscious activation or rehearsal process that
allows representations to be stored in the “associational cortex.”46
This region of the cerebral cortex appears to integrate representa -
tions from a variety of parts of the brain. Consolidation appears to
involve the reorganization of existing memory traces, not the layingdown of new engrams. In this manner, consolidation may make newassociational linkages, condense elements of memory into new clus -
ters of representations, and incorporate previously unintegrated ele -
ments into a functional whole. In cortical consolidation, information
is finally free of the need for the hippocampus for retrieval. This con -
solidation process appears to depend on the rapid-eye-movement
(REM) sleep stage, which is thought to be attempting to make senseof the day’s activities.
47Though filled with a combination of seem -Memory 37

ingly random activations, aspects of the day’s experiences, and ele -
ments from the more distant past, dreams may be a fundamental
way in which the mind consolidates the myriad of explicit recollec -
tions into a coherent set of representations for permanent, consoli -
dated memory.
Research is still in its infancy regarding the details of the consoli -
dation process.48Interestingly, cortical consolidation may take weeks,
months, or perhaps years to occur. For example, if a man sustains ahead injury in a motorcycle accident on the first of January, he maylose recollection of events from November and December of theprior year, but may be able to recall those from October and earlierwithout difficulty. This is called “retrograde” amnesia and involvesimpairment in the ability of the hippocampus to retrieve not-yet-con -
solidated memories. He may also experience severe difficulty recall -
ing events after the accident, called “anterograde” amnesia. This
involves damage to the hippocampus’s ability to encode new itemsinto long-term explicit memory. Working memory may remain unim-paired. Also, the man’s ability to encode or retrieve items fromimplicit memory will be intact. He can learn new skills and haveemotional associations to recent events, but he will be unable torecall when he acquired the new knowledge or to have any sense oftime or self connected with the recollections.
Many forms of amnesia involve the impairment of explicit pro-
cessing in the setting of intact implicit memory. Explicit recollections,as we’ve seen, require focal, conscious attention, and are processedthrough the initial phases of encoding in working memory and theninto long-term memory on their way toward cortical consolidation.There are certain situations, however, in which there is a dis-associa -
tion between implicit and explicit memory. “Infantile” or “child -
hood” amnesia is one such example we will discuss below , in which
normal infants’ and young children’s implicit memory is intact, buttheir explicit recall, especially episodic memory, is impaired. Otherexamples include hypnotic amnesia; the effects of certain medica -
tions, such as the benzodiazepines (minor tranquilizers); surgical
anesthesia; neurological conditions such as brain injury and Korsa -
koff’s syndrome; and divided-attention phenomena, such as an
experiment in dichotic listening. In this last case, a subject is asked topay attention to only one ear while listening to two auditory lists ona set of headphones. For example, in the left ear is played a list ofzoo animals, in the right a list of flowers. When asked to repeat whatwas heard in the focally attended ear (say, the left), most subjects38 THE DEVELOPING MIND

have excellent recall of the animals. When asked what was heard in
the right ear, subjects usually state that they don’t know. When askedto fill in the blank spaces on partially spelled words, such as “r
e,” they are much more likely than subjects exposed to a different
list to fill in the word “rose.” This is an example of indirect recall, ameasure of implicit memory. A subject’s brain has encoded the flow -
ers implicitly, so that the brain is “primed” (that is, made more
likely) to bring up a flower when given a cue. Subjects have no con -
scious recall of what they heard, or even a sense that what they are
writing is a reflection of something they experienced. Without focal
attention, items are not encoded explicitly. Implicit memory is intact,
but explicit memory is impaired for that stimulus or event.
49
THE SUBJECTIVE EXPERIENCE OF EXPLICIT
AND IMPLICIT MEMORY
When either semantic or episodic explicit memory is retrieved, there
is an internal sensation of “I am recalling something.” This distin-guishes explicit recollection from implicit ones, in which there is nosuch subjective sense of remembrance. Explicit memories take anumber of forms. Semantic memory is a type in which we can recallfactual information, such as the capitals of the major countries ofEurope. If we recall that we were once in those cities but cannotsummon the sensation of the self in time on the trip, then this reflectsa semantic memory for a personally experienced event. In the past,this form of memory may have been considered by academicians as apart of autobiographical recall, but recent neuroscientific studies sup -
port the notion that semantic recall lacking a sense of self is in fact
quite different from episodic recall.
50Noetic consciousness (knowing
the fact that one was once in Europe) is thought to be quite distinctfrom autonoetic consciousness (recalling the self’s experience of thetrip), both in subjective experience and in the involvement of theprefrontal cortices in the latter process. Episodic recall activatesautobiographical memory representations and evokes a process ofmental time travel—the sense of the self in time—which differentiatesit from semantic recollections.
The distinct experiential aspects of memory are thought to
involve different centers of activation within the brain.
51For exam -
ple, semantic recall appears to involve a dominance of left over right
hippocampal activation. Autobiographical recall, in contrast, in -Memory 39

volves more of the right hippocampus and right orbitofrontal cor -
tex.52Here we see that structure and function within the brain corre -
late with our day-to-day encounters with subjective experience. This
distinction may reveal itself when we sense that a fact is knownwithout any feeling that it is a part of our experienced life. Thoughsemantic and episodic memory have much in common—they areflexibly accessible, have virtually unlimited capacities for represent -
ing “data,” are encoded with contextual features, and can be
retrieved in a declarative manner via language or drawing—they infact appear to be mediated by somewhat distinct mechanisms.
53
For episodic memory, there appears to be a much larger process
involved than merely the autobiographical content of representationsof personally experienced events: Autonoetic awareness involves theexperience of mental time travel and is directly linked to the pro -
cesses of the prefrontal regions of the brain. Autonoetic conscious -
ness is created within the various layers of prefrontal function.
54
These include an integrating capacity, in which more posteriorly
stored information can be organized and sequenced into a meaning-ful set of representations; executive functions, which provide a moreglobal control of widely distributed brain processes; and the media-tion of self-reflection and social cognition.
55We can see that mental
time travel is more than a subjective sense of feeling oneself in thepast, present, or future: It is an actively constructive mental processthat creates the self within a social world. It turns out that several in-dependent lines of research point to the frontal regions—especiallythe orbitofrontal cortex in the right hemisphere—as a crucial areafor integrating memory,
56attachment,57emotion,58bodily representa -
tion and regulation,59and social cognition.60
Within explicit autobiographical memory, we can find a number
of variations on these elements of self in time. For example, you mayrecall a general sense of yourself from your senior year in highschool. This generic episodic recollection can be thought of as a gen -
eral descriptor summating across your perceptions of a year of spe -
cific episodes. In a sense this is a self-concept, or a self-schema made
conscious, about yourself during that year. In contrast, you may beable to recall a specific event during that time, such as your last dayof high school. In retrieving this memory, you may recall it as anevent you observed from a distance, as if you were taking an out -
sider’s perspective. This is an “observer” recollection, which some
might consider a distanced form of episodic retrieval, but otherswould label an event memory within semantic recall.
61In contrast,
you may recall the event as if you were actually there; this is a “par -40 THE DEVELOPING MIND

ticipant” or “field” recollection. In this case, you would be able to
see things from your actual perspective. Observer recollectionsappear to involve less emotional intensity than field recollections do.Autonoesis thus evokes elements of the self’s lived experience, ratherthan merely the propositional (factual) representations of noetic con -
sciousness.
The process of reactivating representations from explicit mem -
ory is often dependent on the features of the internal and external
environment. When there is a match between retrieval cue and mem -
ory representation, the process is called “ecphory.”
62Ecphory de -
pends upon the features of the eliciting stimulus and the form in
which the representation has been stored in memory. This effect ofthe context on the retrieval of explicit memory reveals how retrievalis enhanced when conditions have similarities in the physical world(sights, sounds, smells) or in one’s state of mind (emotions, mentalmodels, states of general arousal) to those that were present at thetime of the initial encoding. In this way, explicit memory is said to be“context dependent.” The hippocampus is able to encode its cogni-tive mapping on experiences, giving them a context in which they areboth registered and stored. The actual representations of such experi-ences are thought to be stored in more posterior portions of thebrain. The prefrontal regions are thought to carry out the process ofcreating an episodic “retrieval state” in which a match betweenretrieval cue and stored representation (ecphory) can occur.
63
Individuals may have recollections in which they may lack an
understanding of how the contextual cues have led to specific events’being recalled. They may explore these memories by searching for amatch between the features present at the time of retrieval and at thetime of the original event. Such a search can sometimes reveal theunderlying emotional meaning or gist of a particular recollection.However, the sense of mental time travel by itself does not mean thatthe recollection is accurate. It merely implies that the prefrontallymediated autonoetic awareness circuits are involved in the activationof stored or internally generated representations, not that ecphoryhas occurred. In this manner, the prefrontal region may serve toattempt to create accurate assemblies of representations—but, accu -
rate or not, they may contain a sense of the self recalling the past.
This can be viewed as what we can call an “ecphoric sensation,”which has a sense of conviction that the recalled memory is indeedaccurate. We can have a clear sense that something happened whenin fact it did not. Such subjective sensations may be a part of imagi -
nation, dreaming, or inaccurate as well as accurate recollection.Memory 41

The richness of recollection we may feel in reflecting on past
experiences is shaped in part by internal or external context cues,which can then initiate a cascade of further related recollections. Ini -
tial ecphory (the retrieval cue’s matching the stored memory repre -
sentation) is followed by a series of sometimes unpredictable associa -
tive linkages influenced by both memory and present experience.
These associated recol lections and retrieval cues can be woven into
the process of remembering and can become a part of the “recon -
structed” memory. Representations resembling those of the past are
reassembled anew during the process of recollection. Retrieval isthus, as Robert Bjork has suggested, a “memory modifier”: The actof reactivating a representation can allow it to be stored again in amodified form.
64The frontal lobes, in carrying out the integrative,
executive, and socially constructive remembering of the self, candirectly shape the nature of autobiographical recollections and lifestories. These processes explain one way in which our memories—things we may regard as facts—can actually change over time andevolve over the lifespan.
Often cues will activate both explicit and implicit elements of
memory. The initial subjective experience of this frequent process canoften be the emergence of nonverbal sensations or behavioralimpulses (implicit recollections), which initiate the beginning of anexplicit recollection. These elements may not feel as if something isactually being recalled, but may be experienced as a wave of internalsensations and images. As explicit memory retrieval becomes linkedto these implicit counterparts, one may begin to get a sense of somefactual elements or images that begin to have the sensation of “I amremembering something now.” On a daily basis, we actively recon -
struct neural net profiles that have encoded both implicit and explicit
circuits establishing representations derived from past experiences.The internal, subjective sensations of these distinct forms of memoryparallel their anatomic distinction within the brain.
65
Explicit memory is often communicated to ourselves and to oth -
ers in the form of descriptive words or pictures communicating a
story or sequence of events. If these involve the sense of self at sometime in the past, then they are a part of explicit autobiographicalmemory. We listen to the words and receive a linguistic message, orsee the pictures and have a conscious sense of the story being told.But recollections usually involve the association of these explicit ele -
ments with their implicit counterparts. To sense these, it is important
to recall (explicitly) that the activation of implicit memory does not42 THE DEVELOPING MIND

have a sense of “something is being remembered.” We sense, per -
ceive, or filter our explicit memory through the mental models of
implicit memory. We can watch for the shadows that such implicit“recollections” cast on the stories we tell, as well as on nonverbalaspects of behavior and communication.
For example, a thirty-five-year-old woman began to recount her
experiences of being raised by a violent, alcoholic father. When shebegan to tell her story, her eyes became filled with tears, her handsbegan to tremble, and she turned away from her therapist. Shestopped speaking and seemed to become frozen, with a look of terroron her face. For the therapist, the feeling in the room was intenseand consuming. The patient began to speak again, but this timespoke of her father’s “positive attributes.” Her nonverbal communi -
cation remained, though she wiped away her tears and tried to
“compose” herself and not “worry so much about the past.” In thiscase, the patient was being flooded by the implicit elements of herearly experiences, evoked in part by her recounting the story of herfather’s rages. As she began to divert the narrative she was relating,only parts of the implicit memories were able to be diffused. Despitethis diversion, for the remainder of the session she continued to feelfrightened and humiliated.
The challenge in cases like this one is to listen to the words as
well as the nonverbal elements of communication that let us knowwhat others are experiencing and remembering. We must keep inmind that only a part of memory can be translated into the lan-guage-based packets of information people use to tell their life storiesto others. Learning to be open to many layers of communication is afundamental part of getting to know another person’s life.
CHILDHOOD AMNESIA
For over a century, clinicians have been aware of an impairment inthe ability of older children or adults to recall the first years of theirlives. Initial impressions suggested that this “memory barrier” is forthe period before the ages of five to seven years. Psychoanalytic writ -
ings from the past suggested that infantile amnesia is due to some
traumatic, overwhelming experiences that are being blocked, andthat one focus of treatment should be to uncover this “repressionbarrier.”
66Modern analytic thinking does not support this notion,
however.Memory 43

Developmental psychologists view childhood amnesia differently,
suggesting that immaturities in the sense of self, in the sense of time,in verbal ability, and in narrative capacity may be the factors limitingrecall for the period before the age of about two to three years.
67
Neurobiologists investigating this form of amnesia have looked atthe development of the hippocampus/medial temporal lobe and theorbitofrontal region during the first years of life as a possible media -
tor of the phenomenon of childhood amnesia.
68This view supports
the developmental psychologists’ observations in providing the likelyneurobiological underpinnings to this normal developmental form ofamnesia. In this way, explicit memory may require the neural matu -
ration of the hippocampus to allow for the full expression of first
semantic and then later episodic memory.
Let’s explore the nature of the development of explicit memory
by examining the experiences of a young girl. A one-year-old is ableto have implicit recollection of all sorts of experiences: becomingexcited when she hears the car pull into the garage, knowing emo-tionally on some level that her mother is coming home; learning towalk; or generating mental models for repeated experiences. She hasalready developed the capacity for generalized recollections, called“general event knowledge.”
69Before the age of eighteen months, she
has begun to develop the ability to recall the sequence of events inher world.
70She thus can encode and retrieve facts from specific
experiences. This can be considered a form of semantic memory, inwhich knowledge of specific events can be recalled after a longdelay.
71
After about eighteen months, the child develops self-referential
behaviors which reveal a sense of continuity of the self throughtime. By her second birthday, she can now begin to talk about events
that have happened to her. As she continues to mature, her sense ofself develops more fully and may allow for the gradual emergence ofepisodic memory and the capacity for mental time travel—forremembering herself in specific experiences in the past. As herprefrontal regions develop, this capacity becomes increasingly com -
plex and sophisticated. These regions may continue to develop into
adulthood and may explain the deepening capacity for self-awarenessand autonoetic consciousness throughout the lifespan. At this earlyage, the child can say that she saw a dog that morning, or that shewent to visit her grandfather at the park. She can narrate her ongo -
ing experience and can verbalize and plan for her anticipations of
future events. Though now she can talk about her recent recollec -44 THE DEVELOPING MIND

tions, she cannot episodically remember when she was an infant.
Some facts that she has learned during her second year of life, how -
ever, may be quite available to her within semantic memory, such as
the names of objects and what things do. The work of Patricia Bauerand her colleagues suggests that even experiences that occurred afterthe child’s first birthday but before the advent of spoken languagemay be recalled verbally with considerable accuracy after manymonths. These recollections are likely a part of explicit semanticmemory and not derived from the yet-to-be-accessible autobiographi -
cal process.
72
Some authors argue that childhood amnesia is not an impair -
ment in general explicit recall, but rather is very specifically due to
the developmental lag in the onset of episodic memory.73Support for
this view comes from the more recent findings that children even intheir second year of life have a remarkable ability to retain factsabout novel experiences with great accuracy.
74Thus these studies
suggest that semantic explicit memory is intact from quite early on.
How does episodic memory develop? A few findings that
explore the impact of experience on autobiographical memory maybe useful in examining this question. Children who have more expe-riences of talking about their memories with their parents are able torecall more details about their lives later on.
75“Memory talk” is a
common process in which parents focus their attention on the con-tents of a child’s memories. A similar observation is that parents whoparticipate in an “elaborative” form of communication have childrenwith a richer sense of autobiographical recall. Elaborative parentstalk with their children about what they, the children, think aboutthe stories they read together. In contrast, “factual” parents—theclassification designating parents who are found to talk only aboutthe facts of stories, not a child’s imagination or response—have chil -
dren with a less developed ability for recall.
76There is probably a
range of communication styles between the extremes of these tworesearch categories. Nevertheless, these findings support the generalprinciple that interpersonal experiences appear to have a direct effecton the development of explicit memory. As Bauer and colleagueshave stated, “The talk in which children and parents engage prior to,during, and/or after an event works to organize, integrate, and,thereby, facilitate children’s memory for it.”
77
Are these merely genetic findings revealing that parents give rise
to offspring who naturally, genetically, will have their same traits? Tobe sure, one must await further studies, such as those that mightMemory 45

examine the narratives of identical twins raised apart, to clarify the
origin of these differences in narrative style. There is clearly a differ -
ence in narrative experience, whatever the origin: Some families par -
ticipate in frequent co-construction of narrative and elaborative
memory talk. In reinforcing this kind of experience, parents mayfacilitate their children’s ability to describe their memories, as well astheir imaginations. In a similar fashion, children raised in familiesthat discussed people’s emotional reactions tended to be more inter -
ested in and able to understand others’ emotions.
78These children
are also taught that what they have to say about the contents of theirminds is important. Each of these experiences may enhance thecapacity for emotional regulation.
79Could these effects be mediated
by the experience-dependent growth of the orbitofrontal regionsresponsible for affect regulation and the encoding and retrieval ofepisodic memory? No studies exploring this possibility have beenpublished yet.
In general, childhood amnesia raises the larger issue about
remembering and forgetting. Our internal sense of who we are isshaped both by what we can explicitly recall, and by the implicit rec-ollections that create our mental models and internal subjective expe-rience of images, sensations, emotions, and behavioral responses.The inability to recall the first years of life explicitly reveals a differ-ential development among several modalities of memory. The firstyear appears to enable implicit but not explicit encoding andretrieval. The circuits mediating the various forms of implicit mem-ory are fairly well developed at birth. The second year has beenshown to allow for a form of explicit recollection that is most likelyto be semantic in nature. Such a capacity is likely mediated by thematuration of the medial temporal lobe, including areas of the hip -
pocampus. By eighteen months to two or three years of age, episodic
memory begins to emerge. The emergence of this process may befacilitated by the development of the prefrontal regions of the brain,especially the orbitofrontal cortex. As these regions develop activelyduring the preschool years, episodic memory undergoes significantmaturation. The ongoing development of a sense of self during thistime enables this form of autonoesis to grow rapidly and becomemore elaborate. As the sense of self continues to develop, the intrica -
cies of self-experience evolve.
Nelson and Carver explain, “What makes possible the changes
in explicit memory through the preschool period is the developmentof various prefrontal functions that can come to the assistance of the46 THE DEVELOPING MIND

medial temporal lobe (explicit) memory system. For example, it is
generally not until the preschool period that children begin to rou -
tinely employ strategies to help them remember things; the use of
strategies, of course, is a quintessential prefrontal function.” Theyfurther state that “the neural circuitry involved in long-term memorydevelop slowly over the infancy and preschool period. The relevantstructures that are thought to develop during this interval include thecircuits that pass along information from the medial temporal lobe,where initial encoding and consolidation is performed, and the cor -
tex, where memory is stored. It is neural maturation, then, that likely
accounts for the gradual ‘recovery’ from infantile amnesia.”
80
EMOTION, REMEMBERING,
AND FORGETTING
Is everything that is experienced remembered? No. Forgetting is an
essential aspect of explicit memory; if we were to have easy access toevery experience we have encoded, our working memory would beflooded with extraneous facts and images, and normal functioningwould become impaired.
81Which events, then, are more likely to be
remembered and which forgotten? It turns out that many studies ofemotion and memory point to an inverted-U-shaped-curve effect.
82
Experiences that involve little emotional intensity seem to do little toarouse focal attention, and have a higher likelihood of being registeredas “unimportant” and therefore not easily recalled later on. Eventsexperienced with a moderate to high degree of emotional intensityseem to get labeled as “important” (probably by anatomic structures inthe limbic system, such as the amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex,which we’ll discuss later in the book) and are more easily rememberedin the future. If events are overwhelming and filled with terror, a num -
ber of factors may inhibit the hippocampal processing of explicit mem -
ory, and therefore may block explicit encoding and subsequent
retrieval.
83Such factors include divided attention, amygdala discharge,
and release of noradrenaline and corticosteroids in response to massivestress. Such conditions allow implicit memory to be encoded whileexplicit processing is impaired.
84
Although even one-time occurrences can alter synaptic strengths,
repeated experiences and emotionally arousing experiences have thegreatest impact on the connections within the brain. In other words,not all encounters with the world affect the mind equally. StudiesMemory 47

have demonstrated that if the brain appraises an event as “meaning -
ful,” it will be more likely to be recalled in the future.85The brain
appraises the significance of stimuli in numerous ways, including theactivation of areas such as the amygdala. If the amygdala is acti -
vated, then the engram encoded at that particular time is thought to
be marked as significant; this has been called a “value-laden” mem -
ory.
86The neuronal mechanism for this labeling is the pronounced
increase in synaptic strengths at the time of that specific experience.As we’ll see in Chapter 4, value systems in the brain may serve asneuromodulatory circuits with processes that (1) enhance neuronalexcitability and activation; (2) enhance neuronal plasticity and thecreation of new synaptic connections; and (3) have extensiveinnervation linking various brain regions. This emotionally chargedvalue-laden memory is thus made more likely to be reactivatedamong the myriad of infinite engrams laid down throughout life.
The relationship between emotion and memory suggests that
emotionally arousing experiences are more readily recalled later on.As James McGaugh has suggested, “the evidence suggests the possi-bility that the influences of several neuromodulatory systems onmemory may be integrated by interactions occurring within theamygdala. . . . The evidence thus strongly supports the generalhypothesis that endogenous neuromodulatory systems activated byexperience play a role in regulating memory storage.” He goes on tosuggest that “the strength of memories depends on the degree ofemotional activation induced by learning. Highly emotional stimula-tion may well, as William James (1890) suggested, ‘almost . . . leavea scar on the cerebral tissue’ in the form of lasting changes in synap -
tic connectivity.”
87In other words, emotion involves a modulatory
process that enhances the creation of new synaptic connections viaincreases in neuronal plasticity.
What are the mechanisms of this increased plasticity? The exact
link between emotion and the activation of genes to initiate new syn -
apse formation has not been clarified. However, there are some
intriguing possibilities suggested by studies done on the molecules ofmemory in invertebrate animals.
88A protein called CREB-1 (cyclic
AMP response element-binding) appears to lead to the activation ofgenes that initiate the protein synthesis necessary to establish synap -
tic connections. The growth of new synapses is normally constrained
by inhibitory memory-suppressor genes that appear to regulate thetransfer of information from short-term storage, such as workingmemory, into long-term memory. This suppression may be mediated48 THE DEVELOPING MIND

by a protein called suppressor CREB-2. If this process studied in
“lower” animals is found to be utilized by our own memory pro -
cesses, then perhaps it is our brain’s way to ensure that irrelevant
stimuli are not encoded into long-term memory: Some active processwould need to be initiated to produce structurally based encoding ofevents into long-term memory. While these are exciting findings,their relevance to human memory, and specifically to the emotionalmechanisms by which the amygdala and other structures enhancememory encoding, must await future investigations.
The relationships among memory, emotion, and the self are
complex. Looking toward neurobiology for some insights into theseprocesses can be enlightening. As Robert Post and colleagues havesuggested:
The amygdala is thought to be involved with imparting the emo -
tional significance to an object and linking it to other memory sys-
tems initially imparted by the hippocampus but then subserved byother complex cerebral pathways potentially involving many hun-dreds of thousands if not millions of synapses. Just the way theproperties of objects are synthesized convergently by differentpathways, we can surmise that the historical and emotional signifi-cance of objects are likewise “synthesized,” but also edited,updated, and revised based on new experiences. In this fashion,the more complex associative experiential properties and cues maybe attached to critical objects in the environment, such as one’sparents, siblings, and even the concept of oneself.
89
By creating meaning, our emotional neuromodulatory systems help
organize and integrate our memories. Our lives are filled withimplicit influences, the origins and impact of which we may not beaware. In the case of childhood amnesia, this intact implicit memory
in the presence of an impairment in explicit recall is a normal findingunrelated to trauma. As children’s lives unfold, they are able to recall
more and more of the events in their lives as these are woven into anarrative picture of the self across time. This narrative emerges asvalue-laden memories are consolidated and become a part of the per -
manent explicit autobiographical memory system. Not every experi -
ence will be episodically recalled; this is a part of normal forgetting.
Our minds must selectively inhibit the encoding, recollection, andconsolidation of many events that have occurred. If we were tobecome bombarded by irrelevant explicit detail, we would becomeconfused and overwhelmed.Memory 49

STRESS, TRAUMA, AND MEMORY
Stressful experiences may take the form of highly emotional events
or, when overwhelming, overtly traumatizing experiences. The degreeof stress will have a direct effect on memory: Small amounts have aneutral effect on memory; moderate amounts facilitate memory; andlarge amounts impair memory. The effect of stress appears to bemediated by the characteristic neuroendocrine responses involvingthe immediate transient effects (lasting seconds to minutes) ofnoradrenaline release and the more sustained effects (lasting minutesto hours) of glucocorticoids such as cortisol, also known as “stresshormones.” The mechanisms of these agents are complex. Recentstudies suggest that the HPA axis involves the release of stress hor -
mones that directly affect the hippocampus, a region with the highest
density of receptors for these blood-borne agents. Chronic stress mayproduce elevated baseline levels of stress hormones and abnormaldaily rhythms of hormone release. The effects of high levels of stresshormones on the hippocampus may initially be reversible andinvolve the inhibition of neuronal growth and the atrophy of cellularreceptive components called dendrites.
90High levels of stress not only
transiently block hippocampal functioning, but excessive and chronicexposure to stress hormones may lead to neuronal death in thisregion, possibly producing decreased hippocampal volume, as foundin patients with chronic posttraumatic stress disorder.
91Activation of
the autonomic nervous system leads to the release of epinephrine andnorepineprhine (known as the catecholamines), which are thought toaffect the amygdala directly. The amygdala, as we’ve seen, plays animportant role in establishing the value of an experience and inte -
grating elements of encoding with the hippocampal processing of the
event. Excessive stress hormone or catecholamine release appears,respectively, to impair the hippocampal and amygdala contributionsto memory processing.
92
Highly emotional events may involve a certain degree of stress
response. Particular cascades of physiological and cognitive reactionsmay reinforce the effects of stress on memory. As Bower and Sivershave noted:
Several factors working in concert promote better memory for
highly emotional events. Prominent among these are the personalsignificance of the event, its distinctiveness or rarity and selectiverehearsal. . . . When emotionally aroused, the brain triggers reac -50 THE DEVELOPING MIND

tions from the autonomic nervous system and the endocrine sys -
tem; the latter releases stress hormones into the blood stream, cre -
ating persistent arousal and reactivation of whatever thoughts are
salient in the cognitive system. This arousal persists for severalminutes and has an effect analogous to involuntary recycling ofthe stressful occurrence and the events leading up to it. Suchrehearsal enhances the degree of learning of whatever aspects ofthe event were encoded. Beyond this physiological arousal thatcontinues for several minutes, our minds have a tendency to returnrepeatedly over many hours or days to memories of emotionallyupsetting events, perhaps triggered by external cues or ideationalsequences that have been associated with the aversive event.
93
In this manner, emotionally arousing experiences become better
remembered by a combination of direct physiological effects (per -
haps on the genetic activation leading to synapse formation, as dis -
cussed above) and complex cognitive effects on the encoding of
memory via the retrieval, rehearsal, and reencoding process.
Under some conditions, explicit memory may be blocked from
encoding at the actual time of an experience. Trauma may be pro-posed to be such a situation. Various factors may contribute to theinhibition of hippocampal functioning needed for explicit memory atthe time of a severe trauma.
94During a trauma, the victim may focus
his attention on a nontraumatic aspect of the environment or on hisimagination as a means of at least partial escape. Divided-attentionstudies suggest that this situation will lead to the encoding of parts ofthe traumatic experience implicitly but not explicitly. Furthermore,the release of large amounts of stress hormones and the excessive dis -
charge of amygdala activity in response to threat may impair hippo -
campal functioning. The outcome for a victim who dissociates
explicit from implicit processing is an impairment in autobiographi -
cal memory for at least certain aspects of the trauma (explicit block -
age may refer to “psychogenic” amnesia). Implicit memory of the
event is intact and includes intrusive elements such as behavioralimpulses to flee, emotional reactions, bodily sensations, and intrusiveimages related to the trauma.
95Individuals who dissociate during and
after a traumatic experience have been found to be the most vulnera -
ble to developing posttraumatic stress disorder.96As we’ve discussed,
chronic stress may actually damage the hippocampus itself, as sug -
gested by the finding of decreased hippocampal volume in patients
suffering from chronic posttraumatic stress disorder.97Under such
conditions, future explicit processing and learning may be chroni -Memory 51

cally impaired. Furthermore, in addition to damaging the hippocam -
pus, early child maltreatment may directly affect circuits that link
bodily response to brain function: the autonomic nervous system, theHPA axis, and the neuroimmune process.
98These ingrained ways in
which adverse child experiences are “remembered,” and directlyaffect the development of regulatory brain structures that governbasic brain–body processes, may explain the markedly increased riskfor medical illness in adults with histories of childhood abuse anddysfunctional home environments.
99
On the basis of this information, one can propose that psycho -
logical trauma involving the blockage of explicit processing also
impairs the victim’s ability to cortically consolidate the experience.100
With dissociation or the prohibition of discussing with others whatwas experienced, as is so often the case in familial child abuse, theremay be a profound blockage to the pathway toward consolidatingmemory. Unresolved traumatic experiences from this perspective mayinvolve an impairment in the cortical consolidation process, whichleaves the memories of these events out of permanent memory. Butthe person may be prone to experiencing continually intrusiveimplicit images of past horrors. Nightmares, occurring during thedream stage of sleep and involving active REM sleep disturbances,may reveal futile attempts of the brain to resolve and consolidatesuch blocked memory configurations. Dream stages of sleep arethought to play a central role in reorganizing memory and in rein-forcing the connections between memory and emotion.
101
Although not linked within their independent domains of study,
dream research, memory investigations, and the study of adaptationto trauma may help us understand some important processes inmemory and trauma. Endel Tulving and coworkers have proposed amodel of “hemispheric encoding–retrieval asymmetry.”
102In brief,
this model draws on a range of investigations suggesting that the leftprefrontal cortex plays a dominant role in the encoding of episodic
memory, whereas the right prefrontal cortex is essential in episodicretrieval. The dreams of REM sleep involve markedly increased brain
activity. Eye movements have been associated with the activation ofthe opposite side of the brain (that is, movement to the left is associ -
ated with right-hemisphere activation).
103(This finding explains why
so many individuals look to the left during autobiographical recall—which, as we now know, activates right prefrontal regions.)
All of these findings taken together raise the following proposal,
which remains to be substantiated by specific research. During the52 THE DEVELOPING MIND

normal dreaming state, the left and right hemispheres are activated
in an alternating, rhythmic, and synchronous fashion. Activation ofthe right orbitofrontal region of the prefrontal cortex mediates a“retrieval state” for the reactivation of episodic representations. Leftorbitofrontal activation initiates an “encoding state” in which repre -
sentations can be registered, linked together, and encoded into a
reorganized or consolidated form. REM sleep is crucial for memoryconsolidation and has been suggested to facilitate long-term potentia -
tion, allowing the strengthening of synaptic connections.
104Consoli -
dation may be mediated by a process involving the synchronous
retrieval of autobiographical memory via the right orbitofrontal cor -
tex with the encoding into episodic memory via the left orbitofrontal
region of those right-hemisphere representations. Memory may be“reorganized” during dreaming via the simultaneous retrieval (rightside) of information that is then encoded into new consolidatedforms (left side) via the dream process. The prefrontal regions haveextensive innervation to various parts of the brain, including theneocortical associative cortex. The newly reorganized episodic mem-ory becomes consolidated within the associational cortex, where it isnow independent of the hippocampus and available for laterretrieval. Future access of these newly reorganized memory represen-tations can occur within autonoetic consciousness as mediated by theright orbitofrontal regions. The essential feature of such a process isthe synchronous activation of right and left hemispheres to syntheti-cally retrieve and encode episodic memory into a consolidated form.Dreaming thus permits episodic memory representations to becomethe engrams for consolidative encoding. The result may be, literally,a “consolidation” of episodic memory into a coherent set of repro -
cessed and more fully integrated representations. The result of such a
process, we can propose, is the stuff of our life narratives.
We can further propose that autonoetic consciousness of trau -
matic events is disturbed in individuals who have experienced trauma
that remains “unresolved.” As we’ll see in future chapters, this unre -
solved state of mind has important implications for the mind’s func -
tioning and for interpersonal relationships. Some individuals may
become flooded by excessive implicit recollections, in which they losethe self-monitoring features of episodic recall and feel not as if theyare intensely recalling a past event, but rather that they are in theevent itself.
105Others have knowledge of a traumatic event but no
sense of self: They have noetic but not autonoetic awareness of theexperience. The capacity of the left prefrontal region to encode epi -Memory 53

sodic memory may have been impaired by blocked explicit encoding
as proposed above and/or by the flood of right-hemisphere represen -
tations of the overwhelming event. Various studies of trauma
patients reveal a significant asymmetry in hemispheric activity, withunresolved traumatic memories being associated with an excessivelyright-dominant activation pattern.
106Traumatized children have also
been found to have asymmetric brain abnormalities and altereddevelopment of their corpus callosum, the band of tissue that allowsfor interhemispheric transfer of information.
107These findings, com -
bined with the clinical observation of REM sleep disturbances in
those with posttraumatic stress disorder, support the proposal thatbilateral cooperation of the hemispheres may be necessary for theconsolidation of memory in general—and that failure to consolidatememories of traumatic events may be at the core of unresolved trau -
ma. Such a view also points to the generalization that impairment in
bilateral integration of information (the flow of energy and represen-tations across the hemispheres) may be proposed as a marker of psy-chological impairment.
In individuals with chronic posttraumatic stress disorder, the
damage documented in hippocampal structure and function mayreveal one aspect of their difficulties in resolving traumatic experi-ences.
108The resolution process can thus be proposed to involve the
integration of the trauma into a larger associational matrix withinthe mind. Such an integration may result in a more coherent autobio-graphical narrative and a resolution of disturbances in REM sleep,and may depend upon the integration of various domains of themind within the consolidation of memory. These possibilities will beexplored in detail in the final two chapters.
As we shall also see in subsequent chapters, a lack of cortical
consolidation may clinically be seen in the absence of a narrative ver -
sion of a traumatic experience. Furthermore, there may be an inabil -
ity to establish a sense of coherence and continuity across various
states of mind. Traumatic states may remain isolated from the nor -
mal integrative functioning of the individual and thus impair devel -
opment. Implicit elements of major and perhaps even minor traumat -
ic events may continue to shape the individual’s life without
conscious awareness. In this view, negative influences on develop -
ment may impair mental health by blocking the normally unre -
stricted flow of information within the mind.
This restricted flow may impair the creation of life stories that
would otherwise allow for emotionally significant events to be placed54 THE DEVELOPING MIND

in the larger associational network of permanent, consolidated mem -
ory. Schemata of the self and of others in the world help shape the
structure of such a cognitive framework of memory. In other words,implicit mental models help shape the organization of explicit auto -
biographical memory. Traumatic memories that are unresolved do
not reach this point of being consolidated into the larger frameworkof implicit–explicit consolidated narrative memory. They can be seeninstead as remaining in an unstable state of potential implicit activa -
tions, which tend to intrude upon the survivor’s internal experiences
and interpersonal relationships.
THE ACCURACY OF MEMORY
AND THE IMPACT OF TRAUMA
Clinicians, educators, journalists, attorneys, and lawmakers all share
concerns about answers to questions of remembering and forgetting,especially in cases involving allegations of childhood abuse. As onereviews the research findings and wades through the controversiesand politics, a few simple truths become clear. Individuals can expe-rience traumatic events and be unable to recall them explicitly lateron; a wide range of research over the last hundred years supportsthis view.
109Research in the last ten years has supplied a neuro-
scientific explanation for this old knowledge.110Years can go by
before a contextual change in an individual’s life occurs and the rec-ollection of a traumatic event can become available to conscious rec -
ollection.
111This has sometimes been referred to as “delayed recall.”
Although delayed recollection may be quite accurate, explicit mem -
ory is exquisitely sensitive to the conditions of recall. Recounting the
elements of explicit autobiographical memory is a social experiencethat is profoundly influenced by social interaction. Thus what isrecounted is not the same as what is initially remembered, and it isnot necessarily completely accurate in detail.
The human mind is extremely suggestible throughout life, partic -
ularly in childhood.
112This suggestibility allows us to attend schools
and to permit our minds to become deeply influenced by the views ofothers. Often we maintain critical analyses of whether the informa -
tion we are being supplied is trustworthy, and thus whether it should
become a part of our memory systems. However, the accurate deter -
mination by such “metamemory” processes of the veridicality of a
memory can be distorted by a number of factors, including drugMemory 55

states, hypnosis, and intense and repeated questioning within certain
forms of interrogation. Some individuals may in general be more sus -
ceptible to suggestive influences than others. Suggestibility studies
suggest that it is possible for an individual to be firmly convinced ofthe veridicality of a “recollection” when in fact the event beingrecalled has never occurred. Thus a person’s degree of convictionabout the accuracy of a memory may not correspond to its accu -
racy.
113The use of internal corroborations, such as the structure of
memory systems and the relationship between implicit and explicitcomponents of the memory of an event, may be useful in under -
standing how past experiences have influenced a person’s life. Exter -
nal corroborations, such as the reported experiences of other family
members, police reports, photo albums, and journals, may be usefulin creating a fuller picture. Knowing that memory is social and sug -
gestible, and that the act of retrieving a memory can actually alter its
form for subsequent storage, is important for interviewer and inter-viewee alike.
To put it simply, actual events can be forgotten, and non-
experienced “recollections” can be deeply felt to be true memories.These findings leave us with several important principles. Patients arevulnerable to the suggestive conditions of psychotherapy. Cliniciansmust be careful to take a neutral stance with respect to their belief inthe accuracy of recollections. Conditions that enhance suggestibilityand the suspension of critical metamemory processes should be eitheravoided altogether or used only with extreme caution and informedconsent. These conditions include hypnosis, amytal interviews, andintense, repeated questioning by an examiner. Clinicians should makespecial efforts to be aware of professional and personal biases thatmay directly influence their views about trauma and psychopatholo -
gy. These views may manifest themselves in both the verbal and non -
verbal behavior of a therapist. Excessive interest in a patient’s trau -
matic experience versus interest in the patient himself can lead to a
nonconscious pressure within the patient to keep the therapistinvolved by elaborating stories of trauma.
On the other hand, those who deny or are unaware of the effects of
trauma on the functioning and development of the mind (such as theadaptations of dissociation and amnesia) are also likely to inhibit theelaboration of others’ actual life histories, both verbally andnonverbally. If a person’s history includes trauma, then a relationshipwith a nonaware friend, spouse, or therapist will not provide the safehaven in which the traumatized individual can begin to explore the56 THE DEVELOPING MIND

often fragmented and frightening aspects of memory. Traumatized
individuals may be extremely cautious about revealing the humiliatingand painful past experiences they may have had. They may have a deepsense of shame regarding these traumatic events, which can make themexquisitely sensitive to the attitudes of others and vulnerable to a senseof being misunderstood or discounted. Victims of childhood abuse maybe especially susceptible to feeling that they are “not being believed”and will be wary of revealing their hidden pain to a nonsupportive lis -
tener. For example, a therapist who is not able to entertain the possibil -
ity that a given individual may indeed have a quite accurate and per -
haps delayed recall of a traumatic event may be inhibiting proper
therapy from occurring.
There is great societal concern, controversy, and confusion about
the accuracy of memories and the effects of trauma. Memoryresearchers have focused their efforts on how best to study the effectsof trauma on memory, and can help bring our attention to theimpact of trauma on us as individuals, communities, and a society. Aspecial issue of the journal Development and Psychopathology has
compiled the latest thinking about these issues.
114To exemplify some
of these academicians’ concerns, what follows are a number ofreflections on the impact of trauma by some of our leading investiga-tors in the study of memory.
The investigation of trauma and memory is challenging because
the laboratory setting of experiments, as well as available naturalisticexperiences of highly stressful events such as visits to the doctor,invasive medical procedures, or even natural disasters, are in someways inherently different from intrafamilial child maltreatment. AsRobyn Fivush has stated:
The research on traumatic memories conducted thus far, however,
has focused on public events, events which may be painful orstressful, but do not involve secrecy or shame. But many traumasexperienced by young children are silenced. The ability to discusspast events with others, and to verbally rehearse these events tooneself, may play an instrumental role in children’s developingabilities to understand and interpret their experiences. Placing pastevents in the context of one’s ongoing life history allows one tointegrate past experiences into a cohesive sense of how the worldworks and who one is. Children experiencing traumatic experi -
ences who are not given the opportunity to discuss these events
with others may not be able to integrate these negative experi -
ences, and thus may be left with recurring fragments of memoryMemory 57

that are associated with highly negative affect that cannot be
resolved.115
Other memory researchers share this compassionate view of the
impact of trauma and urge us to work toward alleviating the suffer -
ing that trauma produces both in individuals and in our societies. As
Christianson and Lindholm suggest:
Although there are documentation of forgotten, as well as of
remembered, childhood trauma, it seems that most often the mem -
ory processes associated with traumas experienced in early age are
not simply a matter of either/or, such that we either remember orforget them. Instead, both forgetting and remembering can occurselectively, and individuals may represent these memories in verydifferent ways. . . . Children lack the experiences and resources tohandle trauma on their own and therefore they need a lot of sup -
port from parents to overcome these experiences. Children who
have been involved for example in accidents or catastrophes, usu-ally process the experience by talking about it with their parentswho help them come to terms with the event. If a close relative, onthe other hand, is responsible for inflicting the trauma, such as inincest cases or domestic violence, a child is not in the same posi-tion to deal with the experience. . . . Unprocessed and disinte-grated memories of a childhood trauma may not only cause prob-lems and suffering for the individual him/herself, but can alsoconstitute a serious threat for other people. Perpetrators of seriouscrimes, such as murder or rape, have often experienced severetraumas in childhood for which they have never received anyhelp.
116
Violence in our society has multiple causes.117The impact of violence
on children may be complicated by the fact that their inherent men -
tal models of the world as a safe place are directly affected by their
witnessing of violence in the community. As Lynch and Cicchettihave noted:
Children exposed to ongoing stress and trauma, such as that asso -
ciated with exposure to community violence, may develop schemas
of the world as a hostile place (Cicchetti and Lynch, 1993, Dodge,1993) and experience changed attitudes about people, life, and thefuture (Terr, 1991). Significant figures such as children’s caregiversmay come to be viewed as incapable of keeping children safe fromthe dangers present in their environment. Likewise, children may58 THE DEVELOPING MIND

feel that they are not worthy of being kept safe. If such beliefs per -
sist, then they may contribute to the development of insecure rela -
tionships with caregivers among children who live in threatening
and violent environments (Lynch and Cicchetti, 1998[b]).118
These learning experiences in the community may thus have a direct
effect on children’s models of attachment to their caregivers. As weshall see in the next chapter, these models directly influence a widerange of mental processes, from memory to emotion regulation.Lynch and Cicchetti describe one aspect of the cascading effect oftrauma on security of attachment by noting that
secure children may attend to interpersonal information more flex -
ibly, resulting in increased relationship success. If children who
have been traumatized can develop and maintain representationalmodels that are open and secure, then the likelihood that they willexperience successful interpersonal relationships and more positiveoverall adaptation may be greater. Traumatized children with inse-cure representational models may be more likely to experiencetraumatic stress reactions, in part because they may be less able toengage in successful and supportive interpersonal relationships.
119
In other words, attachment relationships that offer children experi-
ences that provide them with emotional connection and safety, bothin the home and in the community, may be able to confer resilienceand more flexible modes of adaptation in the face of adversity.
The impact of trauma is also mediated by the direct toxic effects
of chronic stress on the brain. As Bremner and Narayan have urgedus to note:
Findings of hippocampal atrophy and memory deficits in stress
have broad implications for public policy. With recent data show -
ing that 16% of women have a history of childhood sexual abuse,
it is clear that childhood trauma is a major public health problem.If stress results in damage to the hippocampus, this could have farreaching effects on childhood development. Given the importantrole that the hippocampus plays in learning and memory, victim -
ized children may suffer in terms of academic achievement. These
deficits in academic achievement may plague them throughout therest of their lives. An increased emphasis is needed to directresources and attention to the prevention and treatment of child -
hood victimization as well as stress at other stages of develop -
ment.
120Memory 59

Memory forms the foundation for both the implicit reality
(behavioral responses, emotional reactions, perceptual categoriza -
tions, schemata of the self and others in the world, and possibly
bodily memories) and explicit recollections of facts and of the selfacross time. In this way, we must understand the many layers ofmemory in order to comprehend other persons’ present and past lifeexperiences and the ways they anticipate and plan for the future. Aswe shall see, the disorganizing effects of trauma and its lack of reso -
lution can be passed from generation to generation. The emotional
suffering, the stress-induced damage to cognitive functioning, theinternal chaos of intrusive implicit memories, and the potential inter -
personal violence created as a result of trauma produce ripple effects
of devastation across the boundaries of time and human lives. As wewill explore in the chapters ahead, disruptive interpersonal relation -
ships produce incoherent functioning of the individual mind. This
connection between interpersonal and individual process is clearlyseen in an important aspect of memory, the narrative telling of ourlife stories.
MEMORY AND NARRATIVE
The telling of stories has a central place in human cultures through-out the world and plays a crucial role in the interaction betweenadult and child.
121From an early stage in development, children
begin to narrate their lives—to tell the sequence of events and inter -
nal experiences of their daily existence.122What is so special about
stories? Why are we as a species so consumed by the process of tell -
ing and listening to stories?
By the second year of life, children begin to develop the “later”
form of memory, called declarative or explicit, which includes bothsemantic (factual) and episodic (remembering oneself in an episode intime) memory.
123“Narrative” memory is a term referring to the way
in which we may store and then recall experienced events in storyform. “Co-construction of narrative” is a fundamental process, stud -
ied across cultures by anthropologists, in which families join together
in the telling of stories of daily life.
124
The developmental psychologist Lev Vygotsky said that a child’s
internalization of her experiences with parents creates thought.125In
this view, children who narrate life events with their parents willbegin to narrate to themselves. Their imaginings and the contents of60 THE DEVELOPING MIND

their memories will become active parts of their internal and con -
scious worlds. This view also reveals the possibility that some of our
most cherished personal processes, such as thought or even self-reflection, may have their origins as interpersonal communication.
As fundamental creations of social experience, stories embody
shared cultural rules and expectations, exploring the reasons forhuman behavior and the consequences of deviations from the cul -
tural norm. Stories also captivate our attention, in that they require
us to participate in the active construction of the mental lives andexperiences of the characters. In this way, a story is created by bothteller and listener.
The hippocampus and prefrontal (including orbitofrontal) re -
gions mediate explicit autobiographical memory, and thus this form
of memory is directly related to an integrated spatial and temporalmap. As the millions of traces of perception within explicit encodingare laid down through working memory, only a selected portion willbe brought into long-term memory. Of this selected set of memorytraces, much fewer will survive the translation of these into perma-nent memory. This latter process of cortical consolidation, as dis-cussed above, may be fundamentally related to dreams and to thenarrativization of episodic memory. Dreaming is a multimodal narra-tive process containing various elements of our daily experience, pastevents, mental models, and present perceptual experience. The unitof a day, marked by the consolidation process of REM sleep, maythus be seen as a form of chapter in a life story. Each day is literallythe opportunity to create a new episode of learning, in which recentexperience will become integrated with the past and woven into theanticipated future.
Stories involve the perspective of the teller (first or third person,
past or present), various characters’ activities and mental states(emotions, perceptions, beliefs, memories, intentions), and the depic -
tion of conflicts and their resolution.
126Several genres of narrative are
present from early life on: fictional, schematic (general descriptors ofevents), and factual. These stories can be about others, or they canbe autobiographical. Stories of each type may actually overlap tovarying degrees with the other genres. For example, fictional storiesoften involve elements of the teller’s own life story, even if this isunintentional on the part of the teller. Autobiographical accountsmay often incorporate generalizations from repeated experiences oraspects of imagined events. Thus the emergence of a story mayinvolve multiple layers of narrative genres.Memory 61

Stories, in the form of bedtime routines, myths, films, plays,
novels, diary entries, dinner conversations, or psychotherapy ses -
sions, are present throughout our lives. Many forms of human inter -
action—from children’s play and drawing to adults’ joint attention to
autobiographical reflections—involve the co-construction of narra -
tive around the memory talk between individuals.
Narrative can be seen as a fundamental process that reveals itself
in various ways. It creates shareable stories (often called “narra -
tives”), determines patterns of behavior (called “narrative enact -
ment” or “performance”), and may influence our internal lives (in
the form of dreams, imagery, sensations, and states of mind). As dis -
cussed in later chapters, we can also propose that the narrative pro -
cess directly influences emotional modulation and self-organization.
The storytelling and story-listening process often involves the
essential features of social interaction and discourse. The teller pro -
duces verbal and nonverbal signals that are received by the listener, andthen similar forms of communication are sent back to the teller. This
intricate dance requires that both persons have the complex capacity toread social signals, to share the concept of the existence of a subjectiveexperience of mind, and to agree to participate in culturally acceptedrules of discourse. Stories are thus socially co-constructed. One canargue that even writers working in “isolation” have an imagined audi-ence with whom they are engaged in active discourse. It is no wonderthat the story process requires an intact social system of the brain tomediate this exquisite circle of communication.
127
The creation of narrative coherence can be facilitated by social
experiences. It is by focusing on this narrative system that we canbegin to see the relationship between narrative co-construction andthe acquisition of more adaptive self-organization, leading to coher -
ent functioning. In the next chapter, we will explore the ways in
which attachment relationships promote narrative processing, emo -
tional communication, and the development of the mind.
The influence of narrative on internal experience is revealed
most dramatically in dreams, guided imagery, and journal writing.The myriad of representations in each of these processes may oftensurprise the conscious mind. Dreams weave elaborate stories incor -
porating a wide array of images from various points in time. Guided
imagery brings to the fore sets of vivid experiences that containactive reflections and themes about an individual’s priorities andpresent life challenges. Journal writing can often reveal concerns andperspectives about life that have been unavailable to simple intro -62 THE DEVELOPING MIND

spection. By defining the process of narrative as more than just the
verbal creation of stories, we can identify how each of these internalexperiences is shaped by the central narrative themes in our lives.
Narrative enactments can be seen in the patterns of behavior, of
relating, and of decision making that steer the course of an individ -
ual’s life.
128Why call this “narrative” and not just “learned behav -
ior?” Recognizing the central role of themes in bringing some sense
of continuity to a person’s life directions is helpful in understandingwhy the person does what he does—and how to help him changethat behavior if necessary. Our nonconscious mental models may berevealed as narrative themes. The central, coherence-creating, narra -
tive process has a unifying quality that links otherwise disparate
aspects of memory within the individual. Enactments, then, are thebehavioral manifestations of this core narrative process that linkspast, present, and future. Awareness of the role of early life experi -
ences in shaping both what is processed and how information about
the mind itself is handled can help us to negotiate our way throughthe complexities of the mind and social relationships.
Narratives reveal how representations from one system can
clearly intertwine with another. Thus the mental models of implicitmemory help organize the themes of how the details of explicit auto-biographical memory are expressed within a life story. Though wecan never see mental models directly, their manifestation in narra-tives allows us to get a view of at least the shadow they cast on theoutput of other systems of the mind.
THE REMEMBERED
AND THE REMEMBERING SELF
Each of us has innumerable anecdotes which can serve to illustrate
particular sentiments or sets of events from our pasts. The notion ofa single narrative for a human life is too limited, as memory and thenature of our selves are forever changing. As our present state ofmind reflects the social context in which our narrative is being told,we weave together a tapestry of selected recollections and imagineddetails to create a story driven by past events as well as by the needto engage our listeners. Thus the expectations of the audience play amajor role in the tone of storytelling. This social nature of narrativemeans that the remembering self is perpetually in a process of creat -
ing itself within new social contexts.
129Indeed, as we continue toMemory 63

change as individuals through time, our narratives will also evolve as
a reflection of the dynamic nature of life and human relationships.
Edward Reed states that “perception is to self as memory is to
selves,”130emphasizing the important point that in any given moment
we perceive and interpret experience from a new view. As we accu -
mulate lived moments across time, we are capable of recalling not as
one self but as the many types of selves that have existed in the past.Narrative recollection, then, is the opportunity for those varied statesto be created anew in the present.
To extend this argument a bit further, we actually perceive in the
present in various dimensions. The “self” at any given moment in timeis filled with a myriad of layers of mental representations, only some ofwhich are selected as a part of conscious experience. Thus the remem -
bered self is multilayered. As time passes and we shift across various
states, we can indeed recall various ways of being from the past. As ourstate in the present may also vary from one moment to the next, thestate-dependent quality of retrieval suggests that we will also narrateour lives from the standpoints of multiple selves.
With all of this flexibility and change in response to the environ-
ment and to internal factors, what makes for any kind of continuity inthe narrative process? Though states of mind, social context, and selec-tive recollection certainly influence narrative telling, specific and con-sistent patterns in the structure of the narrative process do appear toemerge within an individual. One feature that may lend longitudinalcontinuity to the narrative process is the important role of mental mod-els in shaping the themes of stories. These pervasive elements ofimplicit memory help create the “between-the-lines” messages of thestories we tell and the lives we live. Another element is the structure ofthe individual’s narrating process itself. As we shall see in the nextchapter, early attachment experiences are associated with specific pat -
terns of how people narrate their lives.
REFLECTIONS: SELF AND OTHER
ACROSS TIME
From the beginning of life, the brain responds to experience with the
establishment of connections among neurons. Those pathways acti -
vated simultaneously become associated with one another and are
more likely to be activated together again in the future. As noted ear -
lier in this chapter, this is Hebb’s axiom. Before the development of64 THE DEVELOPING MIND

the hippocampus in the medial temporal lobe, the brain is only able
to have implicit memory. This diverse form of memory is thought toinclude behavioral, emotional, perceptual, and possibly somato -
sensory memory. When implicit memory is reactivated in the future
(“retrieved”), it does nothave a sense of self, time, or of something
being recalled. It merely creates the mental experience of behavior,emotion, or perception. The condensation of such experiences aregeneralized in the creation of schemata or mental models, which arefundamental to implicit memory.
During the second year of life, the hippocampus matures enough
for a second form of memory to become available. Explicit memoryrequires focal attention for encoding and leads to the long-term andthen permanent accessibility of elements of first factual and laterautobiographical memory. The encoding of explicit memory, which isdependent upon the hippocampus, yields a form of retrieval thatinvolves the sense of recollection—and, if autobiographical, of theself at some time in the past. A process called “cortical consolida-tion” appears to be essential for items in long-term explicit storageto be placed in permanent memory within the associational regionsof the neocortex, where they become independent of the hippocam-pus for retrieval.
The autobiographical narrative process is directly influenced by
both implicit and explicit memory. Autonoetic consciousness is theexperience in which we are able to perform “mental time travel,”creating representations of the self in the past, present, and future.As the child develops into the third year of life, the orbitofrontal cor -
tex becomes capable of mediating episodic memory or autonoesis. In
a fundamental manner, the narrative process allows individuals toshape the flow of information about the self and others.
When we attend a funeral and are surrounded by others who
have also known and shared the life of someone we love who hasnow passed away, we can feel the deceased’s “spirit” within us. And,indeed, the patterns of activation of those trillions of neuronal con -
nections within each of us at the memorial service may have similari -
ties because of our parallel experiences with the deceased. As survi -
vors, we attempt to deal with the loss by creating a sense of
coherence with the loved one within the narratives we construct ofour lives together. At such a memorial service, stories often will betold to “capture the life and the essence” of the person who has justdied. This sharing of stories reflects the central importance of narra -
tives in creating coherence in human life and connecting our mindsMemory 65

to each other. Stories are passed from generation to generation and
help keep the human soul alive.
The psyches of those who have been an intimate part of our
development live on within us in both the details and the structure ofthe ongoing story of our lives. Altering our life paths may requireexamination of these influences on our core narrative structures andthemes. Through an elaborative form of contingent communica -
tion—the connection between two individuals’ mental states, and
their joint attention to each other’s life stories—interpersonal rela -
tionships of many forms may facilitate turning points in individuals’
lives, reflected in the changing architecture of their narrative pro -
cesses. Enabling people to achieve a fuller coherence within their
own minds and in their connections to others may help them meetthe challenge of living, in which the self is continually emerging inever-enriching and complex ways. In the next chapter, we willexplore the research findings highlighting the features of human rela-tionships that facilitate the development of emotional resilience and acoherent narrative process.66 THE DEVELOPING MIND

THE DEVELOPING MINDAttachment
CHAPTER 3
/fl2rt
Attachment
THE ATTACHMENT SYSTEM
“Attachment” is an inborn system in the brain that evolves in ways
that influence and organize motivational, emotional, and memoryprocesses with respect to significant caregiving figures.
1The attach-
ment system motivates an infant to seek proximity to parents (andother primary caregivers) and to establish communication with them.At the most basic evolutionary level, this behavioral system improvesthe chances of the infant’s survival. At the level of the mind, attach-ment establishes an interpersonal relationship that helps the imma-ture brain use the mature functions of the parent’s brain to organizeits own processes.
2The emotional transactions of secure attachment
involve a parent’s emotionally sensitive responses to a child’s signals,3
which can serve to amplify the child’s positive emotional states andto modulate negative states. In particular, the aid parents can give inreducing uncomfortable emotions, such as fear, anxiety, or sadness,enables children to be soothed and gives them a haven of safetywhen they are upset.
4Repeated experiences become encoded in
implicit memory as expectations and then as mental models or sche -
mata of attachment, which serve to help the child feel an internal
sense of what John Bowlby called a “secure base” in the world.5
Studies of attachment have revealed that the patterning or orga -
nization of attachment relationships during infancy is associated with
characteristic processes of emotional regulation, social relatedness,access to autobiographical memory, and the development of self-reflection and narrative.
6In 1995, Mary Main summarized the fol -
lowing principles:7
67

1. The earliest attachments are usually formed by the age of
seven months.
2. Nearly all infants become attached.3. Attachments are formed to only a few persons.4. These “selective attachments” appear to be derived from
social interactions with the attachment figures.
5. They lead to specific organizational changes in an infant’s
behavior and brain function.
Qualitative terms describing the nature of the attachment are uti -
lized: Attachments are seen as “secure” or “insecure,” with a variety
of descriptions within these two broad categories.
The attachment system serves multiple functions. For an infant,
activation of the attachment system involves the seeking of proximity.
8
Proximity seeking allows an infant to be protected from harm, starva-tion, unfa vorable temperature changes, disasters, attacks from others,
and separation from the group. For these reasons, the attachment sys-
tem is highly responsive to indications of danger. The internal experi-ence of an activated attachment system is thus often associated with thesensation of anxiety or fear and can be initiated by frightening experi-ences of various kinds, as well as by a threat of separation from theattachment figure.
9
Attachment relationships thus serve a vital function in provid-
ing the infant with protection from dangers of many kinds. Theserelationships are crucial in organizing not only ongoing experience,but the neuronal growth of the developing brain. In other words,these salient emotional relationships have a direct affect on thedevelopment of the domains of mental functioning that serve asour conceptual anchor points: memory, narrative, emotion, repre -
sentations, and states of mind. In this way, attachment relation -
ships may serve to create the central foundation from which the
mind develops. Insecure attachment may serve as a significant riskfactor in the development of psychopathology.
10Secure attachment,
in contrast, appears to confer a form of emotional resilience.11
Although attachment behavior is seen primarily in children,
adults continue to manifest attachment throughout the lifespan.12
Especially under times of stress, an adult will monitor the where -
abouts of a few selected “attachment figures” and seek them out as
sources of comfort, advice, and strength. For adults, such attachmentfigures may be mentors, close friends, or romantic partners.68 THE DEVELOPING MIND

HUMAN COMMUNICATION
AND STATES OF MIND
A thirty-year-old woman sits quietly in the chair in her therapist’s
office. She looks puzzled as her therapist repeats his question: “Howwas your visit with your mother last weekend?” She bites her lip,looks away, and gazes down toward the floor, saying nothing. Shereaches up and covers her eyes with her arm. Her breathing becomesmore rapid and shallow. She taps her foot nervously on the floor.Silence. The therapist’s heart begins to accelerate. He finds himselflooking down at the floor and notices his own foot tapping. Thetherapist’s own state of mind is revealed in nonverbal signals: facialexpression, eye gaze, bodily motion, tone of voice, and the timing ofverbal signals (whether fast, slow, in response to other comments, orthe like). His voice is low in volume, and he slowly says, “Oh . . . itwas a hard weekend.” His head feels as if it is about to burst.“HORRIBLE!” the woman suddenly exclaims. The pressure in thetherapist’s head dissipates with a sense of relief. The muscles in hisown face begin to relax from their drawn, tightened state as hersalso relax. The patient’s body becomes less tense. “Horrible ..., ”
she moans, now with tears in her eyes.
As this therapist and patient illustrate, engaging in direct com-
munication is more than just understanding or even perceiving thesignals—both verbal and nonverbal—sent between two people. For“full” emotional communication, one person needs to allow his stateof mind to be influenced by that of the other.
13In this example, the
therapist’s sensitivity to the patient’s array of signals allows his ownstate to become aligned with that of the patient. The sense that hishead is “about to burst,” followed by the release of pressure, showshow the patient’s shifts from bewilderment to rage to sadness isexperienced by the therapist. This shift in his own state may be apart of the internal process that makes him aware of the often subtleand rapid nonverbal signals sent in this direct form of emotionalcommunication. The alignment of the therapist’s state allows him tohave an experience as close as possible to what the patient’s subjec -
tive world is like at that moment. Sensitivity to signals allows for the
therapist’s internal response in his own state, which permits anawareness of his perceptions of the patient’s experience. In additionto yielding important experiential information for the therapist, suchan alignment permits a nonverbal form of communication to theAttachment 69

patient that she is being “understood” in the deepest sense. Her state
directly influences his; she is “feeling felt” by another person. Thisattunement of states forms the nonverbal basis of collaborative, con -
tingent communication.
14The capacity to achieve this attuned form
of communication, sometimes called “affect attunement,”15is depen -
dent on an individual’s sensitivity to signals. Parental sensitivity to
signals is the essence of secure attachments16and can inform us about
how two people’s “being” with each other permits emotional com -
munication and a sense of connection to be established at any age. In
these transactions, the brain of one person and that of another areinfluencing each other in a form of “co-regulation.”
17
This chapter examines the developmental evidence from attach -
ment research demonstrating the importance of this co-regulating
contingent communication and the attunement of states of mind insecure attachment relationships. This is the fundamental way inwhich the brain activity of one person directly influences the activityof the other. Collaborative communication allows minds to “con-nect” with each other. During childhood, such human connectionsallow for the creation of brain connections that are vital for thedevelopment of a child’s capacity for self-regulation.
18Studies reveal
that such relationship experiences are grounded in patterns of com-
munication. We will review how the infant’s mind develops within
these emotional relationships, in order to understand the research-based views of what forms of interpersonal experience facilitate thedevelopment of psychological resilience and emotional well-being.
One essential message is that the developing mind uses the states
of an attachment figure in order to help organize the functioning ofits own states. The momentary alignment of states is dependent uponparental sensitivity to the child’s signals and allows the mind of thechild both to regulate itself in the moment and to develop regulatorycapacities that can be utilized in the future.
19The sensitivity to signals
and attunement between child and parent, or between patient andtherapist, involves the intermittent alignment of states of mind. Astwo individuals’ states are brought into alignment, a form of whatwe can call “mental state resonance” can occur, in which each per -
son’s state both influences and is influenced by that of the other.
There are moments in which people also need to be alone and not inalignment; an attuned other knows when to “back off” and stop thealignment process. Intimate relationships involve this circular danceof attuned communication, in which there are alternating momentsof engaged alignment and distanced autonomy. At the root of such70 THE DEVELOPING MIND

attunement is the capacity to read the signals (often nonverbal) that
indicate the need for engagement or disengagement.20
As we shall see, states of mind involve various aspects of brain
activity. The flow of energy and of information are both fundamentalcomponents of a state of mind. In this way, attuned communication
involves the resonance of energy and information. For the nonverbal
infant, this intimate, collaborative communication is without words.This need for nonverbal attunement persists throughout life. Withinadult relationships of all sorts, words can come to dominate the formof information being shared, and this can lead to a different form ofrepresentational resonance. Such a verbal exchange may feel quiteempty if it is devoid of the more primary aspects of each person’s inter -
nal states.
21Infant attachment studies remind us of the crucial impor -
tance of nonverbal communication in all forms of human relationships.
ASSESSING ATTACHMENT
Attachment Theory
When children develop secure attachments to parents, these allow
them to go out into the world to explore and develop relationshipswith others.
22Initially, children seek proximity to their attachment
figures which gives them a sense of security. Being near parents canhelp provide a soothing safe haven, especially when children areupset. As they grow, children internalize their relationships withattachment figures; this gives them the ability to develop a schema ormental model of security called a “secure base.” It is postulated thatchildren can use a form of remembering called “evocative” memoryby the age of eighteen months to bring an image of an attachmentfigure forward in their minds, which helps to comfort them.
23
Children carry those to whom they are attached inside of them, inthe form of multisensory images (faces, voices, smell, taste, touch), amental representation of the relationship with them, and the sensethat they can be with them if this is needed.
An “internal working model of attachment” is a form of mental
model or schema.
24As described in Chapter 2, the formation of men -
tal models is a fundamental way in which implicit memory allows
the mind to create generalizations and summaries of past experi -
ences. These models are then used to bias present cognition for more
rapid analysis of an ongoing perception, and also to help the mindAttachment 71

anticipate what events are likely to happen next. In this way, forming
mental models is the essential manner in which the brain learns fromthe past and then directly influences the present and shapes futureactions.
Attachment studies examine the active nature of both children’s
and parents’ mental models of attachment relationships. How cansuch learned, implicit models be assessed? Models exert their effectson an array of observable phenomena, including overt behavior,interpersonal communication, emotional regulation, autobiographi -
cal memory, and narrative processes. For example, these models
directly influence how a parent interacts with a child. Parental expec -
tations, perceptions, and behavior interact with the inborn tempera -
mental features of the child in determining what the exact nature of
the parent–child transaction will be like. Attachment research hasshown that parents’ expectations and patterns of relating are pro -
foundly influenced by their own attachment history and attitudes inthe present, as revealed in what Main has termed their “state of
mind with respect to attachment.”
25
In the middle of the twentieth century, a British psychoanalyst
and psychiatrist, John Bowlby, turned to animal behavior studies toenrich the traditional analytic views of child development.
26Bowlby
wrote about attachment, separation, and loss in ways that power-fully influenced such practices as the establishment of primary care-givers in orphanages and in pediatric hospital wards. His idea wassimple and powerful: The nature of an infant’s attachment to theparent (or other primary caregiver) will become internalized as aworking model of attachment. If this model represents security, thebaby will be able to explore the world and to separate and mature ina healthy way. If the attachment relationship is problematic, theinternal working model of attachment will not give the infant a senseof a secure base, and the development of normal behaviors (such asplay, exploration, and social interactions) will be impaired. Ofcourse, if circumstances change, a securely attached infant or youngchild can become insecurely attached, and an insecure attachmentcan become secure.
Infant Attachment Research:
The Strange Situation
Mary Ainsworth, a professor of developmental psychology at the
University of Virginia, collaborated with Bowlby at the Tavistock72 THE DEVELOPING MIND

Clinic in the 1950s.27As a psychologist, she was interested in devel -
oping a research measure that would be a quantifiable instrument
capable of assessing the security of attachment. Her idea was this: tostudy mother–infant interactions over the first year of life, and thento do something that would enable observers to access and classifythe proposed internalized working model of attachment. Her Balti -
more study
28did just that and has been replicated hundreds of times
since then by other researchers throughout the world. In this study,after a year of observations in the home, each mother–infant pair ordyad was brought to a laboratory setting. At various times in thetwenty-minute procedure, the infant stayed with the mother, with themother and a stranger, with only the stranger, and then alone for upto three minutes. The idea was (and still is) that separating a one-year-old from her attachment figure within a strange environmentand at times with a stranger should activate the infant’s attachmentsystem. One should then be able to study the infant’s responses atseparation and at reunion. The most useful assessments came at thereunion episode of this paradigm.
What Ainsworth found in her initial landmark study was that
infants’ behavior at reunion fell into specific patterns of responding.
29
Each of these patterns corresponded in a statistically significant wayto the independently performed home observation ratings for theyear prior to the laboratory assessment. This lab measure is calledthe Ainsworth or Infant Strange Situation.
30The initial study classi-
fied three distinct attachment patterns. Now we also use a fourth,developed by Mary Main and Judith Solomon,
31which helps further
define the nature of some infants’ behavior.
At the time of reunion, the infant’s response to the mother’s return
is coded for the way he seeks proximity to the mother, the ease withwhich he can be soothed, and the rapidity of his return to play. The ideais that an infant who has developed an internal working model of asecure attachment will be able to use the parent to soothe himselfquickly and return to his childhood task of exploration and play. If theinfant has an insecure attachment model, then the return of the parentwill not facilitate such an emotional regulatory function or allow thechild to use the parent to return to playing.
The Strange Situation classifications (see Table 2, right side) at
one year of age have been associated with numerous findings as chil -
dren grow into adolescence, such as emotional maturity, peer rela -
tionships, and academic performance.
32These correlations suggest
that patterns of relating between parent and child have significantAttachment 73

74 THE DEVELOPING MIND
TABLE 2. AAI Classifications and Corresponding Patterns of Infant Strange
Situation Behavior
Adult state of mind with respect to attachment Infant Strange Situation behavior
Secure/autonomous (F) Secure (B)
Coherent, collaborative discourse. Valuing of
attachment, but seems objective regarding anyparticular event/relationship. Description andevaluation of attachment-related experiencesis consistent, whether experiences arefavorable or unfavorable. Discourse doesnot notably violate any of Grice’s maxims.Explores room and toys with interest in
preseparation episodes. Shows signs ofmissing parent during separation, oftencrying by the second separation. Obviouspreference for parent over stranger. Greetsparent actively, usually initiating physicalcontact. Usually some contact maintainingby second reunion, but then settles andreturns to play.
Dismissing (Ds)
Avoidant (A)
Not coherent. Dismissing of attachment-
related experiences and relationships.Normalizing (“excellent, very normalmother”), with generalized representations ofhistory unsupported or actively contradictedby episodes recounted, thus violating Grice’smaxim of quality. Transcripts also tend tobe excessively brief, violating the maxim ofquantity.Fails to cry on separation from parent.
Actively avoids and ignores parent onreunion (i.e., by moving away, turningaway, or leaning out of arms when pickedup). Little or no proximity or contactseeking, no distress, and no anger.Response to parent appears unemotional.Focuses on toys or environment throughoutprocedure.
Preoccupied (E)
Resistant or ambivalent (C)
Not coherent. Preoccupied with or by past
attachment relationships/experiences, speakerappears angry, passive, or fearful. Sentencesoften long, grammatically entangled, or filledwith vague usages (“dadadada,” “and that”),thus violating Grice’s maxims of manner andrelevance. Transcripts often excessively long,violating the maxim of quantity.May be wary or distressed even prior to
separation, with little exploration.Preoccupied with parent throughoutprocedure, may seem angry or passive.Fails to settle and take comfort in parenton reunion, and usually continues to focuson parent and cry. Fails to return toexploration after reunion.
Unresolved/disorganized (U/d)
Disorganized/disoriented (D)
During discussions of loss or abuse,
individual shows striking lapse in the monitoringof reasoning or discourse. For example,individual may briefly indicate a belief that adead person is still alive in the physical sense,or that this person was killed by a childhoodthought. Individual may lapse into prolongedsilence or eulogistic speech. The speaker willordinarily otherwise fit Ds, E, or F categories.The infant displays disorganized and/or
disoriented behaviors in the parent’spresence, suggesting a temporary collapseof behavioral strategies. For example, theinfant may freeze with a trance-likeexpression, hands in air; may rise atparent’s entrance, then fall prone andhuddled on the floor; or may cling whilecrying hard and leaning away with gazeaverted. Infant will ordinarily otherwise fitA, B, or C categories.
Note. From Hesse (1999). Copyright 1999 by the Guilford Press. Reprinted by permission. Descriptions of the
adult attachment classification system are summarized from Main, Kaplan, and Cassidy (1985) and from Mainand Goldwyn (1984, 1998). Descriptions of infant A, B, and C categories are summarized from Ainsworth,Blehar, Waters, and Wall (1978), and the description of the infant D category is summarized from Main andSolomon (1990).

influences later in life. Since most of these children have continued to
have the same parents, these correlations by themselves only support,but do not prove, some views that the first year of life is a criticalperiod of development.
33Parents and other caregivers continue to
influence us throughout childhood. Bowlby’s term “internal workingmodel of attachment” was coined in order to emphasize the manipu -
lable working nature of the attachment system.
34Patterns established
early in life have a major impact on functioning, but the individual’sexperiences continue to influence the internal model of attachment.This suggests that new relationship experiences have the potential tomove individuals toward a more secure state of mind with respect toattachment. Intervention studies support the idea that a relationship-based treatment focus can enable proper development to occur.
35
It may at first seem artificial to reduce complex behavior into
segmented, distinct categories. But research must often try to clus -
ter subjects into groups in order to find statistically meaningfulpatterns. These groupings are general patterns, and a given individ-
ual or relationship may reveal elements of several classifications.Nevertheless, this way of thinking scientifically about organiza-tional forms can inform us greatly about global patterns of behav-ior. Longitudinal attachment studies, which follow parents andinfants as they grow throughout the lifespan, require such classifi-cations and have yielded some fascinating and powerful findingsuseful in understanding the nature of human experience.
36As we
review the specific attachment categories, keep in mind that agiven individual may experience a number of elements from eachclassification. The manner in which an individual has come tointegrate a coherent model across numerous experiences may infact be at the heart of how attachment experiences shape the inte -
grating functions that create a coherent mind.
37
A Brief Overview of Infant
Attachment Classifications
Parents who are emotionally available, perceptive, and responsive to
their infants’ needs and mental states—that is, those who are sensi -
tive to their children’s signals—have infants who are most often
“securely” attached. These children seek proximity and quicklyreturn to play in the Strange Situation. The Strange Situation acti -
vates the attachment system; this leads a child to engage in proxim -
ity-seeking behavior, which is then terminated after contact with theAttachment 75

figure to whom the child has a secure attachment.38In low-risk, non -
clinical populations, security of attachment to mothers is found in
about fifty-five to sixty-five percent of infants.39
Parents who are emotionally unavailable, imperceptive, reject -
ing, and unresponsive are associated with “avoidantly” attached
infants. These babies seem to ignore the return of their parents in theStrange Situation. Their attentional and representational state is a“deactivating” one, which leads to an external behavior that mini -
mizes proximity seeking.
40In low-risk samples, twenty to thirty per -
cent of infants are found to be avoidantly attached to their mothers.
Those parents who are inconsistently available, perceptive, and
responsive, and who tend to intrude their own states of mind ontothose of their children, tend to have children who have “resistant” or“ambivalent” attachments. These infants seem anxious, are not eas -
ily soothed, and do not readily return to play in the Strange Situation
at the time of reunion. In this case, there is an “overactivation” ofthe attachment system, in which a child’s attentional/representationalstate leads to external proximity-seeking behavior that is nottermi-
nated by contact with the parent. In other words, the relationshipwith the parent is not able to turn the attachment behavior “off”after reunion, and the child remains with an overactivating or maxi-mizing strategy toward attachment filled with a sense of anxiety.
41In
nonclinical, low-risk populations, five to fifteen percent of infantsdisplay this type of attachment to their mothers.
Finally, parents who show frightened, frightening, or disoriented
communications during the first year of life tend to have infants whoMain and Solomon identified as “disorganized/disoriented” in theirattachments.
42During the Strange Situation, such an infant appears dis -
organized and disoriented during the return of the parent: for example,
some have been observed turning in circles, approaching and thenavoiding the parent, or entering a trance-like state of “freezing” or still -
ness.
43Dyads falling into this attachment category are also given a best-
fitting alternative primary classification of one of the prior three orga -
nized forms of attachment; for this reason, the sum of all of the per -
centages reported here is over one hundred. In nonclinical populations,
disorganized attachments are found in twenty to forty percent ofinfants studied. In parentally maltreated infants, disorganized attach -
ment is found in as many as eighty percent.
44
For each of these classification categories of the Strange Situa -
tion, attachment theory suggests that the pattern of communication
between parent and child has shaped the way the child’s attachmentsystem has adapted to the experiences with the attachment figure. In76 THE DEVELOPING MIND

this way, the genetically preprogrammed, inborn attachment system
has been shaped by experience. This adaptation produces character -
istic organizational changes in the way the child’s mind develops.
This can be seen as a fundamental way in which the mind and pat -
terns of communication of the adult directly shape the organization
of the developing child’s brain.
In particular, these patterns of brain function—these states of
mind—become activated within the context of a specific relationship.One child can have distinct attachment strategies for each parent. Inthis manner, we can propose that the interpersonal relationshipdirectly shapes the neurobiological state of the infant’s brain withininteractions with each caregiver. These states create an attentionaland representational set of activations that are thought to minimizedistress, regulate behavior, and help the child organize the self.
45The
activation of a particular state in the presence of a particular caregiv -
er is an adaptive process. As we’ll see below, both secure attachmentand the “organized forms” of insecure attachment (avoidant and
ambivalent) reveal effective modes of adaptation. In contrast, Mainand Hesse have proposed that the nonorganized form of attachment(disorganized/disoriented) reveals that the infant has been presentedwith an unsolvable problem or “paradoxical injunction”
46in which
the parent, being the source of fear and disorientation, makes anorganized, effective adaptive state impossible to achieve.
47
Adult Attachment: Moving to the Level
of Mental Representations
By pursuing the question of why parents act in such distinctly differ -
ent patterns with their children, Mary Main—a graduate student
working with Mary Ainsworth just following her original attachmentstudies in Baltimore, and presently a professor at the University ofCalifornia at Berkeley—was able to move the field of attachmentbeyond the study of infant behavior and into the representationallevel of analysis.
48Main, with her students Carol George and Nancy
Kaplan, asked the parents in her attachment studies about their rec -
ollections of their own childhood experiences.49What they found was
that a parent’s pattern of narrating the “story” of her early familylife within the semistructured setting of an adult interview could becorrelated with the Strange Situation classification of that parent’schild. In this manner, Main began what is now a powerfully reward -
ing set of investigations by creating a research instrument called theAttachment 77

Adult Attachment Interview (AAI).50Studies using the AAI are being
carried out throughout the world.51
The AAI is a narrative assessment of an adult’s “state of mind
with respect to attachment,” which reflects a particular organiza -
tional pattern or engrained state of mind of that individual at the
time of the interview.52The method of analysis of assessing an adult’s
state of mind with respect to attachment was developed by MaryMain and Ruth Goldwyn (then a visiting and graduate student fromLondon) in the early 1980s. Its robust correlation with that adult’srelationship with his offspring suggests that such a stance is in factquite tenacious in the person’s life.
53Furthermore, attempts to corre -
late the AAI with features of an adult’s personality have not revealed
any significant associations.54This demonstrates that some of the
measures of personality found in behavioral genetics to have a largedegree of heritability are not associated with AAI findings; it there -
fore supports the notion that the AAI is measuring some feature ofthe adult derived primarily from the individual’s experiences.
55
Recent results from carefully performed longitudinal studies using
Main and Goldwyn’s analysis of the AAI in fact have now foundthat secure versus insecure childhood attachment status as observedin Ainsworth’s Strange Situation can often predict later adult attach-ment findings.
56Though all indications point to a primary role of
experiential factors (including childhood attachment and more recentrelationship experiences in certain AAI results as discussed), Mainhas noted that the possible contributions of genetic factors will needto be further examined in future studies that utilize standard behav -
ioral genetics approaches, such as twin and adoption studies.
57
The strength of the AAI’s correlations with the Strange Situation
results has been reinforced by a number of findings suggesting that itis measuring some feature of the subject that is robust, persists acrosstime, and is independent of other variables. These psychometricproperties of this instrument
58include that the AAI is stable with
repeated assessments across a one-month to four-year period59; unre -
lated to most measures of intelligence60; and unrelated to both long-
and short-term memory, social desirability, or interviewer style.61The
AAI is even more predictive of the Strange Situation results than it ispredictive of direct research observations of parenting behavior avail -
able at the present time. van IJzendoorn has termed this a “transmis -
sion gap”
62—a finding that has yet to be fully understood. However,
it reinforces the notion that the AAI is assessing some fundamentalmental process of the parent. All of these findings suggest that under -78 THE DEVELOPING MIND

standing the processes underlying the AAI, including memory, social
communication, and some integrating process creating coherence ofmind, will enable us to explore more fully the interpersonal nature ofthe development of the mind.
The AAI is a semistructured autobiographical narrative in which
an adult, or sometimes a teenager (usually a parent or parent-to-be),is asked a series of questions about her own childhood.
63These ques -
tions include versions of the following: What were growing up and
the person’s early relationship with each parent like? What was theexperience of being separated, upset, threatened, or fearful? Wasthere an experience of loss, and, if so, what was the impact on theindividual and the whole family? How did the person’s relationshipwith her parents change over time? How have all of these thingsshaped the development into adulthood of the individual’s personal -
ity and parenting approach?
The AAI narrative is a subjective account of the recollections of
the individual. It does not claim to be an exact accounting of whatoccurred in the past. The method of interview analysis developed byMain and Goldwyn begins with an examination of the elements ofthe recalled and inferred experiences with parents, and each of thespeaker’s parents is ultimately scored for the extent to which therater concludes that he or she was loving, rejecting, involving/role-reversing, neglecting when present, and pressuring to achieve.
64How-
ever, the most critical aspects of the process of interview analysis restupon the speaker’s ways of presenting and evaluating his history. It ishere that the AAI offers a unique perspective on the relationshipsamong attachment, memory, and narrative.
The AAI narrative is classified through an extensive review of
the interview transcript; the rater examines elements of the describedexperiences from the past, as well as the pattern of communicationbetween the interviewer and the subject.
65In the discourse, and
indeed in our daily conversations, how we talk with people reflectsour internal processes and our response to the social situation of aconversation with another person. The analysis leads to ratings ofwhat is called the current “state of mind with respect to attach -
ment.” Domains of this state of mind include the overall coherence
of the transcript, idealization of parent, insistence on lack of recall,involved/involving (preoccupying) anger, passivity or vagueness ofdiscourse, fear of loss, dismissing derogation, metacognitive monitor -
ing, and overall coherence of mind. In some individuals there is some
disorganization or disorientation in reasoning or discourse whenAttachment 79

focusing on the topic of loss (of a family member by death) or abuse;
this is assessed by scales for unresolved loss and/or trauma.66
The final classification, ascertained after several in-depth read -
ings of the transcript, is based on examination of the numerically
determined profiles across the domains of mental states with respectto attachment, together with directions for classifying the speaker’scurrent state of mind (determined by the discourse analysis). Thisinterview has a tremendous capacity to bring out subtle aspects ofautobiographical narratives. Subjects are often amazed at how thisforty-five- to ninety-minute interview with a stranger can bring outsuch personally meaningful and often previously unrealized aspectsof their early histories. As a parallel to the Strange Situation, the AAIalso places a subject in an unusual setting in which “the unconsciousis surprised” by the discussion of such intimate attachment issues,early memories, and reflections on how these experiences haveshaped the adult’s development and parenting behavior.
67
As Erik Hesse has suggested, the AAI requires that the subject
perform the dual tasks of collaborative communication and search-ing for memories.
68The search for memories of one’s own childhood
and the challenge of maintaining normal discourse—including re-specting Grice’s four maxims of discourse, pertaining to quality,quantity, relation, and manner—can lead to characteristic violations,which are seen as types of incoherences in the narrative process.
69
These maxims form a core feature of the AAI assessment: “1) Qual-ity—be truthful, and, have evidence for what you say; 2) quantity—be succinct, yet complete; 3) relation—be relevant or perspicacious,presenting what has to be said so that it is plainly understood; and 4)manner—be clear and orderly.”
70According to Main and Goldwyn,
optimal discourse can be succinctly described as “truthful and collab -
orative,” and they conceptualize violations of Grice’s maxims as hav -
ing to do with (internal) consistency (quality) versus collaboration
with the interviewer or interview process (quantity, relation, andmanner).
71Assessment of the AAI examines how a subject’s state of
mind at the time of the interview facilitates or impedes the ability tocarry out a truthful/collaborative discourse while simultaneously con -
ducting autobiographical reflections.
The ways in which the narrative reflects such a process is
encoded in the scale assessing the overall coherence of the transcript.With the addition of the other elements that examine features of thenarrative process, an overall “coherence-of-mind” rating is achieved,which assesses the global state of mind with respect to attachment. Itis important to note that generally this adult stance represents an80 THE DEVELOPING MIND

overarching state of mind toward attachment—not the attachment to
each of the adult’s parents. In contrast to a child’s Strange Situationclassification, an adult receives a single “state-of-mind” classifica -
tion, not a relationship-specific category. Hesse has described an
emerging “cannot classify” category—revealed in about five to tenpercent of low-risk samples—which may reveal those individualswho are unable to attain such a unifying overall stance towardattachment.
72As we’ll explore in detail in the last chapter of this
book, the capacity to integrate various elements of mental function -
ing, including autobiographical memory and social communication,
can be viewed as a fundamental integrating process with which themind creates coherence across its various states and mental pro -
cesses.
The AAI results in an interviewee’s being assigned a classifica -
tion (see Table 2, left side, for a listing of these classifications) that
tends to correspond to the quality of her infant’s attachment to herin sixty-five to eighty-five percent of cases.
73These percentages are
actually statistically quite meaningful, even though there is no onehundred percent predictability.
74In fact, of all available measures—
including intellectual functioning, personality assessments, and socio-economic factors—the AAI is the most robust predictor of howinfants become attached to their parents.
75
The AAI has been administered to parents at various ages of a
child: five years after the Strange Situation, which is performed whenthe infant is one year of age; at the same time as the Strange Situa-tion; and during pregnancy, with the Strange Situation performedwhen the infant reaches the first birthday.
76In each of these contexts,
the AAI has a robust association with the specific classification of theinfant–parent attachment. This means that the AAI findings arestrong, seem to be stable across time, and have predictive power evenbefore an infant is born. The parent’s narrative processes are notmerely some reaction to the infant’s temperamental characteristics ora function of the parent–child relationship. Recent studies are nowbecoming available in which children who have received Strange Sit -
uation classifications as infants are being administered the AAI in
late adolescence. In the majority of these studies, the anticipatedfindings are now being realized, in that the Strange Situation resultsgenerally predict, about two decades later, the AAI classifications forthe now grown children.
77Some deviations from these predictions
seem to be related to adverse life events, such as trauma and lossduring the later years of childhood and adolescence.
78
An infant’s attachment is specific to each parent and corre -Attachment 81

sponds with each parent’s AAI classification in a largely independent
manner.79This parent specificity also suggests that the adult–infant
correlations are not merely determined by genetic or other featuresof the child alone, but are a function of the history of parent–childinteractions. Having differing attachment statuses dependent on thestate of mind with respect to attachment of each parent (or othercaregiver) is an important factor in understanding the developmentof these attachment patterns. Also, the four prebirth research studiessupport the idea that the AAI is measuring some variable of a parent,not just some reaction of the parent to a feature of the child’s inborncharacteristics, such as temperament.
80Overall, these findings sup -
port the view of childhood attachment as relationship-based.81
Temperament may play some role in eliciting particular reactions
from parents, but it is not the major variable in determining attach -
ment behavior within the child–parent relationship.82The tempera -
ment and genetically determined features of the parent certainly playa role in overt behavior. Some studies of parenting behavior suggest a
strong genetic influence on particular patterns of emotional availabil-ity, for example.
83As noted earlier, future studies of infant attach-
ment and of the AAI will need to specifically examine the geneticcontribution to these different patterns of attachment. Studies ofidentical twins raised apart and of adoptive children, not available todate, will be helpful in exploring the role of genetic factors in attach-ment. At this point, the findings from attachment studies support thenotion of child attachment as the result of a relationship, not of afeature of the child alone.
If a child has a different attachment pattern with different care -
givers, how does this affect the child’s future adult attachment sta -
tus? The most dominant experiences—for example, those with a pri -
mary caregiver—may be those that tend to exert the most influence
on the adult’s narrative and attachment status.
84Research correla -
tions between Strange Situation status with later AAI classification
are based on the infant’s primary attachment relationship, most oftenwith the mother. One notion is that different attachment models maybe activated in the future, depending on the social situation.
85
Certain child–parent pairs may evoke specific patterns of relat -
ing from the parent, which may lead to different attachment classifi -
cations for different offspring of the same parent. These variations
may explain why the AAI does not have one hundred percent pre -
dictability to the Strange Situation.86It also raises the important issue
of how the AAI may change with life experiences, such as the estab -
lishment of new forms of emotional relationships in parenting,82 THE DEVELOPING MIND

romance, friendship, or psychotherapy.87In this way, relationships
may evoke different patterns of relating in each of us. The states ofmind we experience, including the mental models activated inresponse to communication patterns with others, can in turn shapethe manner in which we establish new relationships. We can findourselves with a very different experience of the self and the self withothers within different relationship contexts.
These social-context-dependent changes reflect the capacity of
the mind to adapt to new situations. However, attachment researchand clinical experience suggest the existence of some tenacious pro -
cess that maintains similar characteristics of the individual over time.
Some of these traits can be seen as elements of implicit memory:mental models of the self and others, behavioral response patterns,and emotional reactions. As an individual reflects on the self acrosstime, these characteristic traits can be seen within the autobiographi -
cal narrative process within the AAI. Main’s term “state of mindwith respect to attachment,” refers to an engrained, temporally sta-
ble, self-organizing mental state.
88This is not a transient, randomly
activated state; rather, from repeated experiences with caregivers, ithas become a characteristic self-defining state—or “trait”—of thatindividual. We will explore the notion of self-defining states of mindlater in the book.
We will now review in more detail the findings from attachment
research with both children and adults, in order to explore these topicsmore fully. A complete review of this fascinating and important area ofresearch is beyond the scope of this chapter, but such surveys are avail -
able in a number of helpful references.
89Attachment research provides
us with a set of rigorously collected data about human communicationand mental coherence, which, as noted earlier, can teach us importantprinciples about how the mind develops within interpersonal relation -
ships. In the detailed discussions that follow, we will explore the impli -
cations of this important work for understanding developmental pro -
cesses, as well as the functioning of the human mind.
ATTACHMENT, MIND,
AND PSYCHOPATHOLOGY
Experiences throughout life shape the functioning of the mind. Those
that occur in the early years may set the stage for continued transac -
tions with the world, which then reinforce those mental functions.Attachment 83

Longitudinal research on attachment suggests that certain early rela -
tionship experiences promote emotional well-being, social compe -
tence, cognitive functioning, and resilience in the face of adversity.90
However, because development is a process, older children, adoles -
cents, and adults may be able to continue to grow and change
despite suboptimal early life experiences.
Insecure attachment is not equivalent to mental disorder, but
rather creates a risk of psychological and social dysfunction.91For
example, social competence in those with avoidant attachments isseverely compromised. Avoidantly attached children have been foundto be controlling and disliked by their peers.
92Disorganized/disori -
ented attachments are sometimes associated with dissociative symp -
tomatology, which, if such individuals are exposed to overwhelming
experiences later in life, may make them prone to developing post -
traumatic stress disorder.93Persons in this group also have deficits in
attention and the regulation of emotion and behavioral impulses.94
Intervention studies that offer young children the opportunity todevelop secure attachments with their caregivers have yielded posi-tive outcomes in terms of the development of emotional, social, andcognitive competence.
95
For example, if an infant does not receive predictable, warm, and
emotionally available communication from caregivers, he may adaptby avoiding dependence on others in the future.
96If his caregiver’s
behavior does not undergo a favorable change, or if other secureattachments do not predominate, this adaptation may make him with-draw from others’ attempts to establish close, warm relationships withhim. At five, ten, or twenty years of age, such an individual may beexperienced by others as “aloof.” Some might interpret such a trait asconstitutional rather than as adaptive to the past environment. Of noteis that recent studies of rats have found that maternal deprivation isassociated with social behavioral problems, which are ameliorated byserotonin medications.
97These findings support the notion that early
attachment experiences directly affect the development of the brain.98
The fact that the behavioral problems return after cessation of thesemedications also supports the view that these brain changes areengrained within the neural pathways regulating basic functions, suchas behavior, emotional regulation, and social relations.
99Furthermore,
such findings remind us that an individual’s favorable response to amedication does not deem the dysfunction as “due to genetics, notexperience.” Early experience shapes the structure and function of thebrain. This reveals the fundamental way in which gene expression isdetermined by experience.
10084 THE DEVELOPING MIND

As Brodsky and Lombroso have noted, “The fact is that neither
genetics nor environmental theories have led to a fundamental under -
standing of the etiologies of the vast majority of psychiatric disor -
ders. If we have learned anything from recent studies, it is that a deli -
cate interplay exists between nature and nurture.” In addressing the
consistent finding that even in studies of inherited disorders withidentical twins the concordance is rarely complete, they go on tostate, “These results suggest that although genetic factors may pro -
vide [the] underlying diathesis or vulnerability for a disorder, envi -
ronmental factors play a critical role in the ultimate expression of
symptoms.”
101Environmental factors play a crucial role in the estab -
lishment of synaptic connections after birth.102For the infant and
young child, attachment relationships are the major environmentalfactors that shape the development of the brain during its period ofmaximal growth. Therefore, caregivers are the architects of the wayin which experience influences the unfolding of genetically prepro-grammed but experience-dependent brain development. Geneticpotential is expressed within the setting of social experiences, whichdirectly influence how neurons connect to one another. Human con-nections create neuronal connections.
One example of risk for emotional disturbances is seen in the
experience of children who experience trauma at an early age.
103
Allan Schore addresses a relevant aspect of the neurobiology of thissituation: “Although the critical period overproduction of synapses isgenetically driven, the pruning and maintenance of synaptic connec-tions [are] environmentally driven. This clearly implies that thedevelopmental overpruning of a corticolimbic system that contains agenetically encoded underproduction of synapses represents a sce -
nario for high risk conditions.”
104“Developmental overpruning”
refers to a toxic effect of overwhelming stress on the young brain:The release of stress hormones leads to excessive death of neurons inthe crucial pathways involving the neocortex and limbic system—theareas responsible for emotional regulation.
105Children who may have
a “genetically encoded underproduction of synapses” may be atespecially high risk if exposed to overwhelming stress. In this way,we can see how experience and genetics interact in the developmentof risk for future disorder. Such risk is ultimately expressed withinthe neural connections of the brain.
An individual’s personality is created from the continual interac -
tion of genetically determined constitutional features and experiential
exchanges with the environment, especially the social environment.
106
Vulnerability to dysfunction emerges from this interaction—not fromAttachment 85

genes and experience in isolation from each other. If the capacity of the
mind to adapt remains into adulthood, then the emotional relation -
ships we have throughout life may be seen as the medium in which fur -
ther development can be fostered. These attachment relationships and
other forms of close, emotionally involving interpersonal connectionsmay serve to allow synaptic connections to continue to be altered, eveninto adulthood.
But how “plastic” is the brain? How open is the brain to further
development beyond the early years of life? Which circuits remaincapable of establishing new connections, and which are relatively“fixed” after certain early periods of development? These are openquestions in neuroscience.
107For some individuals who have experi -
enced suboptimal attachment experiences, the brain may remain
open to further growth and development. For others, early life histo -
ries of absence of any attachment experience (as in severe neglect) or
the experience of overwhelming trauma (as in physical, sexual, oremotional abuse) may markedly alter the neurobiological structure ofthe brain in ways that are difficult if not impossible to repair.
108The
questions that need to be asked are these: How can such experiencesbe prevented? And, if they have already occurred, how can lastingimprovement in these individuals possibly be achieved? A majortheme of attachment research and effective treatment studies is thatintervention via the medium of the attachment relationship is themost productive approach to creating lasting and meaningful results.Attachment research suggests a direction for how relationships canfoster healthy brain function and growth: through contingent, collab -
orative communication that involves sensitivity to signals, reflection
on the importance of mental states, and the nonverbal attunement ofstates of mind.
109
Research at present into the relationship of attachment to psy -
chopathology suggests a number of findings.110A meta-analysis of
AAI studies conducted by van IJzendoorn and Bakermans-Kranenburgindicates that insecure attachment appears to be associated with ahigher incidence of psychiatric disturbance, including anxiety andmood disorders. A study conducted by Carlo Schuengel and his col -
leagues suggests that the presence of an unresolved loss in a parent
who has a primary insecure state of mind with respect to attachmentleads to a less optimal outcome for children than does the presenceof unresolved loss in a parent who has a primary secure status.
111
Adult security of attachment therefore appears to convey a form ofresilience—at least for offspring—even in the face of trauma or loss.86 THE DEVELOPING MIND

This finding is consistent with the general conclusions that attach -
ment provides a framework for adaptation to life experiences: Secu -
rity conveys resilience, whereas insecurity conveys risk. van
IJzendoorn’s meta-analysis indicated that in psychiatric populations,
insecurity in the AAI is far more prevalent and security (“secure/autonomous” status; see below) is far less prevalent than in the gen -
eral population.
112By itself, then, adult or child attachment classifica -
tion is notsynonymous with pathology, but should be viewed as an
organizational component of the mind that provides flexibility andadaptability with security—or, in contrast, rigidity, uncertainty, ordisorganization and disorientation with insecurity.
The essential issue here is how the pattern of communication
with attachment figures has allowed the mind to maintain proximityto attachment figures and establish self-organizing processes.
113In
this manner, Main suggests that the “maintenance of a ‘minimizing’(avoidant) or ‘maximizing’ (resistant) behavioral strategy is thereforelikely eventually not only to become dependent on the control ormanipulation of attention but also to necessitate overriding or alter-ing aspects of memory, emotion, and awareness of surrounding con-ditions.”
114The finding that attachment history is correlated with a
wide variety of mental processes central to the regulation of emotionand behavior may be understood by the examination of neuro-biological studies that implicate the same attachment experience-dependent (orbitofrontal) region in integrating these functions.
115In
this way, the link between insecurity of attachment and risk forpsychopathology may be found within the brain regions that areboth dependent upon patterns of communication early in life forproper development, and responsible for the regulation and integra -
tion of various processes (including attention, memory, perception,
and emotion). Dysregulation of this central integrating process willundermine successful self-organization, which may produce variousforms of disturbances in emotional regulation and lead to mentalsuffering.
SECURE ATTACHMENTS
In the Strange Situation, securely attached one-year-old infants (clas -
sified as “B”) seek proximity after separation, are quickly soothed,
and return rapidly to play. In Ainsworth and her colleagues’ homeobservations of secure parent–child dyads during the first year of life,Attachment 87

the parents were sensitive to the children’s signals—emotionally
available, perceptive, and effective at meeting the children’s needs.116
One could say that these parents were “tuned in” to the infants’emotional state of mind.
117Peter Fonagy and colleagues have
described this ability as a product of the adults’ “reflective function,”in which parents are able to reflect (using words) on the role ofstates of mind in influencing feelings, perceptions, intentions, beliefs,and behaviors.
118For this reason, reflective function has been pro -
posed to be at the heart of many secure attachments, especially when
the parent has had a difficult early life. The nonverbal component ofthis reflective ability can be seen in the capacity for affect attunementas seen in these dyads, in which the emotional expression of eachmember of a pair is contingent with that of the other.
119Attunement
involves the alignment of states of mind in moments of engagement,during which affect is communicated with facial expression, vocal -
izations, body gestures, and eye contact. This attunement does notoccur for every interaction.
120Rather, it is frequently present during
intense moments of communication between infant and caregiver.121
Healthy attunement therefore involves the parent’s sensitivity to
the child’s signals and the collaborative, contingent communicationthat evokes what has been described earlier as a “resonance”between two people’s states of mind: the mutual influence of eachperson’s state on that of the other. Such attunement involves disen-gagement at moments when alignment is not called for andreengagement when both individuals are receptive to state-to-stateconnection. The states being aligned are indeed psychobiologicalstates of brain activity.
122Each individual becomes involved in a
mutual co-regulation of resonating states.123
In emotional relationships of many sorts—including romance,
close friendships, psychotherapy, and student–teacher relationships—there may be aspects of attachment present in which there are thebasic elements of seeking proximity, using the other as a safe havento help soothe oneself when upset, and internalizing the other personas a mental image providing a sense of a secure base.
124These later
forms of attachment can be established in the same manner thatallows a secure attachment to develop in childhood. For the firsttwo, “symmetrical” forms of relationship—friendship and romance—each member of the dyad demonstrates consistent, predictable, sensi -
tive, perceptive, and effective communication. In therapist–patient
and teacher–student relationships—which like parent–child relation -
ships, are “asymmetric”—the sensitivity to signals is the primary88 THE DEVELOPING MIND

responsibility of the former individual, who serves as the sole
“attachment figure” providing a safe haven and secure base for theother. The capacity of an individual to reflect upon the mental stateof another person may be an essential ingredient in many forms ofclose, emotionally engaging relationships. This reflection on mentalstates is more than a conceptual ability; it permits the two individu -
als’ minds to enter a form of resonance in which each is able to “feel
felt” by the other. This intense and intimate form of connection ismanifested both in words and in the nonverbal aspects of communi -
cation: facial expressions, eye contact, tone of voice, bodily move -
ment, and timing of responses. This type of communication is what
reveals attunement of states of mind.
The verbal component of communication can encompass many
issues. Communication that is about the content of the other person’smind—such as “memory talk” or the elaborative style of discoursethat focuses on the perceptions, memory, and imagination of another,as discussed in Chapter 2—enhances the mental processes of memoryand self-reflection.
125Intimate elaborative dialogues also focus on the
other essential features of mental states: thoughts, feelings, inten-tions, beliefs, and perceptions. At the most basic level, therefore,secure attachments in both childhood and adulthood are establishedby two individuals’ sharing a nonverbal focus on the energy flow(emotional states) and a verbal focus on the information-processingaspects (representational processes of memory and narrative) of men-tal life. The matter of the mind matters for secure attachments.
ADULT SECURE/AUTONOMOUS STATE
OF MIND WITH RESPECT TO ATTACHMENT:
FREEDOM TO REFLECT
Securely attached children tend to have parents who have an AAI
classification of “secure/autonomous” present state of mind withrespect to attachment (coded as “F”; think of “free”).
126A parent of
a securely attached child stated,
“My mother was a very caring person, and I remember feeling
very close. My mother used to ask me what happened duringthe day after I came home from school. I remember one daywhen I was very upset. She was a very busy person. I came inthe room, and I remember her putting her books down, and sheAttachment 89

went with me to my room so that we could talk in private. I
don’t remember exactly what she said, but I do remember howgood she made me feel.”
This portion of this adult’s AAI narrative reveals a balanced perspec -
tive that is not overly idealizing. There is an ease of access to general
autobiographical knowledge (e.g., the person’s mother was caringand she felt close to her), and specific autobiographical details areprovided to support these terms. This narrative segment reveals thatthere is general knowledge of what occurred and evidence for what isbeing said. The overall coherence of the narrative is very high andsatisfies Grice’s maxims of discourse. As Hesse has noted, such nar -
ratives reveal that an adult has the capacity to engage in collabora -
tive and coherent discourse while simultaneously examining memo -
ries of attachment-related experiences.
127Another aspect frequently
found in these adults is the ability to reflect on mental processeswithin these narrative accounts.
128Such a reflective function, in
which the mind is able to represent other minds, reveals that theadult has what Fonagy and colleagues suggest is a “mentalizing”capacity.
129This may be essential for a child’s states of mind to be
perceived and responded to by a parent.
Even though some narratives may contain descriptions of less-
than-ideal parenting experiences, a coherence of mind is reflected inthe flow of the narrative discourse; this coherence reveals an ease intalking objectively about the past and an ability to see parents asinfluential in the adult’s development. The parent quoted above hadthis to say about her father:
“My father was very troubled by his being unemployed. For sev -
eral years, I think that he was depressed. He wasn’t very fun to
be around. He’d go out looking for work, and when he didn’tfind any, he would yell at us. When I was young, I think that itwas very upsetting to me. I didn’t feel close to him. As I gotmuch older, my mother helped me understand how painful hissituation was for him, and for me. I had to deal with my angerwith him before we could have the relationship we developedafter my teen years. I think that my drive today is in part due tohow difficult that period was for all of us.”
These reflections on her relationships reveal an ability to balance posi -
tive and negative aspects of her experiences and to reflect on how they
may have affected her during youth and then into adulthood.90 THE DEVELOPING MIND

Adults with a secure/autonomous state of mind may have a flu -
idity in their narratives, self-reflection, and access to memory. They
may have a range of mental models of attachment relationships,which allows them to be flexible in their perceptions and plan ofaction. As Main has described, their attentional/representational statedoes not require a minimizing or maximizing strategy in addressing
attachment-related issues.
130Informal observations suggest that they
can also be seen as having the ability both to enjoy and to modulatehigh levels of emotional intensity, and to experience rewarding emo -
tional connections with others.
The narratives of secure/autonomous parents reveal that their
internal working models of attachment are secure, that they ack -
nowledge the importance of attachment relationships, and that they
are free to live in the present. If their internal working models ofattachment are secure, there is little “leftover business” that inter -
feres with their narratives or, presumably, with their parentingapproach to their children. There is a sense that secure/autonomous
parents have life stories that allow them to live fully in the present,unimpaired by troubles from the past, denial in the present, orattachment-related worries about the future. The minds of such indi-viduals can be described as having an organized and unimpairedflow of energy and information. We can propose that the coherenceof narrative seen in this group of individuals may reflect a well-func-tioning ability to integrate aspects of the self over time—a subject wewill explore in greater detail in Chapter 9.
An informal subset of secure/autonomous adults consists of
those with an “earned” secure/autonomous status.
131These are indi -
viduals whose described experiences of childhood would have been
likely to produce some form of insecure attachment (avoidant,ambivalent, or disorganized). However, the coherence of their tran -
scripts reveals a fluidity in their narratives and a flexibility in their
reflective capacity, such that their present state of mind with respectto attachment is rated as secure/autonomous. These individuals oftenappear, from impressions of the information contained within theirAAI narratives, to have had a significant emotional relationship witha close friend, romantic partner, or therapist, which has allowedthem to develop out of an insecure status and into a secure/autono -
mous AAI status.
132In studies comparing “earned” secure/autono -
mous, “continuous” secure/autonomous, and insecure parents, sev -
eral findings emerge. One is that the attachment of children to
parents in the “earned” and “continuous” secure/autonomous cate -Attachment 91

gories appears to be indistinguishable.133When parent–child interac -
tions were assessed, even under conditions of significant stress, these
two groups were indistinguishable from each other. “Earned” secure/autonomous parents, however, reported more depressive symptoma -
tology than the “continuous” secure/autonomous group, and as
much as or more than the insecure group. Whether this finding isrevealing the continuing effects of a history of suboptimal parenting,or whether these depressive states of mind are affecting the narrativeprocess within the AAI to yield a more pessimistic set of recollec -
tions, has yet to be clarified.
In terms of our discussion of the flow of energy and informa -
tion, these findings with the “earned” secure/autonomous adults may
reflect a flow of knowledge about the self across time. Implicit ele -
ments from early life experiences are quickly activated in intense
emotional relationships, such as those with children and spouses. Ifthis “earned” category truly represents the emotional development ofan individual from an insecure to a secure/autonomous state of mindwith respect to attachment, then the narrative coherence within theAAI may reflect some important integrative process that enables par-ents to break the transgenerational passage of insecure attachmentpatterns.
134Further studies of this population may be helpful in
understanding the factors and mechanisms the mind can use toachieve a coherent integration of mind in the face of suboptimalattachment history.
AVOIDANT ATTACHMENTS
In the Strange Situation, avoidantly attached (“A”) one-year-oldinfants demonstrate no overt response to the return of their parents,who are likely to have a “dismissing” stance toward attachment (seebelow).
135They continue to play and behave as if the parents didn’t
leave or return. Studies have revealed, however, a significant responseby their nervous systems, as measured by heart rate changes.
136
Externally, to an observer, they appear avoidant of the parents’return.
Ainsworth and colleagues found that during the first year of life,
these pairs were characterized by emotional distance and by neglect -
ful and rejecting behavior on the part of the parents.
137These parents
appeared to be emotionally unavailable, relatively insensitive to theirchildren’s state of mind, imperceptive of their children’s needs for92 THE DEVELOPING MIND

help, and not effective at meeting those needs once perceived. Later
studies would show that such parents demonstrated low degrees ofaffect attunement; language expression independent of facial emo -
tions; and difficulty in relating to their children at the children’s level
of development in various situations, such as problem-solvingtasks.
138
The view of such a child’s internal working model of attachment
is that the parent has never been useful at meeting his emotionalneeds and is not attuned to his state of mind; therefore, behaviorally,it serves no purpose to seek the parent upon reunion. Connecting oremotionally joining in an avoidantly attached pair is limited, keepingparent and child relatively isolated compared to a securely attacheddyad. In this manner, the organized adaptive strategy is to have anattentional/representational state that minimizes proximity seeking,reduces expectations, and shapes other attachment-related behaviorsand mental processes accordingly.
139
In an avoidantly attached dyad, the parent is significantly lack-
ing in the ability to conceptualize the mind of the child.140This lack
may be evident in the inability of the parent, and then of the child, toreflect on the mental states of others or of the self. Some individualsmay have a sense of disconnection of which they may be quiteunaware. This sense of distance from others, and from the self, maydominate their experiences. It may also be apparent in how theydescribe their awareness of their own emotions. Informal observa-tions suggest that they tend to engage in dry, logical, analytic think-ing that lacks a sensory or intuitive component. As we’ll see below inthe discussion of adults classified as dismissing with the AAI, there isalso a characteristic lack of richness and depth in the autobiographi -
cal narrative and self-reflections.
141
As described at the beginning of this chapter, and as Bowlby
proposed many years ago,142like other ground-living primate infants,
human infants have an inborn, genetically determined motivationalsystem that drives them to become attached to their caregivers.Although infants become attached to their caregivers whether or notthose caregivers are sensitive and responsive, attachment thrivesespecially on predictable, sensitive, attuned communication in whicha parent shows an interest in and aligns states of mind with those ofa child. Shared states allow for the amplification of positive emo -
tional states and the reduction of negative states in secure attach -
ments. If primary caregivers do not offer these elements of secure
attachment, then the child must adapt to suboptimal interactions. InAttachment 93

avoidantly attached children, such experiences seem to shape expec -
tations and produce an organized adaptation involving a behavioral
response that minimizes frustration: The children act as if the parentsnever left and show no outward signs of needing the parents. At thesame time, the physiological studies of avoidantly attached childrenand their dismissing parents clearly demonstrate that the internalvalue placed on attachment has remained intact and intense, how -
ever.
143The behavioral adaptation in infants, and the cognitive adap -
tations in older children and adults (paucity of autobiographical
memory and narrative, beliefs in the unimportance of relationships indevelopment and in life), are in contrast to the continued internaland nonconscious importance placed on attachment.
ADULT DISMISSING STATE OF MIND
WITH RESPECT TO ATTACHMENT:
MEMORIES FROM AN EMOTIONAL DESERT
“My parents were very helpful to me growing up. They gave me
excellent experiences with classes in school and outside of theregular curriculum. I was able to learn a foreign language andto play two instruments proficiently. [In response to a queryabout her relationship with her parents from early on, shestated:] My parents were very generous people. My father wasvery, very funny, and he taught me the importance of a goodsense of humor. My mother was very neat, and she taught methe benefits of organization. Overall, my family was very good.[When asked for specific memories of her childhood, shestated:] I have very fond memories of my childhood. I don’tremember specific experiences, but I do know that we had avery good family life. There were a lot of good times.”
This adult repeatedly insisted that she did not recall specific child -
hood experiences. She also stated, “I believe in hard work and find -
ing your own way in life. I am raising my children to achieve what I
was able to: independence and stick-to-it-ness.”
This excerpt from an AAI narrative shows the individual’s lack
of interpersonal connections from her childhood development. Adultswith this type of narrative often have the unique feature of insistingthat they do not recall their childhoods. Their general descriptors arenot supported by specific memories, and hence their transcripts havean incoherence defined by violations to Grice’s maxim of quality94 THE DEVELOPING MIND

(consistency) of discourse. Their responses are also generally exces -
sively brief, violating Grice’s maxim of quantity. For example, in
response to a question about the mother–child relationship, they may
state, “My mother was good. I cannot remember anything she did tosupport that word. I just think she was good, that’s all.” Often theimplied sense in the interview is that there was not much emotionalconnection between parent and child. There are also reported exam -
ples of subjects’ describing rejecting or neglecting behaviors on the
part of the parents to support positive general statements offeredabout them. Overall, these narratives suggest that the mentalizingprocesses of the interviewees and their primary attachment figuresmay have been minimal.
144The parent–child interaction appears to
have had a suboptimal quality and quantity of mutual sharing ofreflections on the mental states of others.
The internal working model of attachment in a “dismissing”
(coded as “Ds”) adult is thought to resemble that of an avoidantlyattached child: “My parent is rejecting, and I cannot expect anyemotional comfort or connection from this parent, so I will live onmy own as an adaptation.” This is a mental adaptation, not a con-scious, deliberate choice on the part of the young infant. If a parenthas shown little attunement to a child’s internal state, the child willexperience a world that remains emotionally isolated from that ofthe parent. The child’s sense of self also remains fundamentally sepa-rate from that of the parent.
The narrative of past experiences quoted above has an underly-
ing theme: “Life was good. I learned important things from my par -
ents. I want my children to learn to be independent too.” This per -
son’s account does not actually address the question about the
quality of her relationship with her parents. Her past is summarizedpositively in terms of the products her parents gave her, not theirconnection to or communication with her. As noted earlier, anotherfeature of the narrative is the person’s insistence on her inability torecall details of her childhood. This amnesia seems to include aperiod way beyond five years of age (the time when most of us beginto have ease of access to explicit autobiographical memory). Her“blockage” of memory for her childhood experiences includes mostof her adolescent years as well. We can view these findings as sugges -
tive of the possibility that autonoetic consciousness may be quite
underdeveloped in dismissing individuals, at least for childhoodevents.
Dismissing adults’ insistence that they do not recall their child -Attachment 95

hood is often robust. Main and Goldwyn are cautious, however, in
their interpretation of this insistence on lack of recall, since it couldalso be that it serves to block discourse. This lack of recall shouldnot be misinterpreted as a blocked memory of some trauma. Attach -
ment studies suggest that this lack of recall is associated with the
neglecting, rejecting, and emotionally disconnected pattern of rela -
tionships seen in avoidant attachments, rather than with some form
of trauma-induced blockage as might be seen with physical or sexualabuse.
145Studies also suggest that other aspects of personal knowl -
edge, such as which television shows were popular or what major
world events occurred at particular times in the subjects’ lives arenormally present.
146In other words, noetic consciousness appears to
have developed normally in these individuals.
The emotional distance and rejection that dominate avoidant
relationships create a kind of low-affect environment. It is particu -
larly interesting that preliminary findings from the prospective, longi-tudinal Minnesota Parent–Child Project suggest that avoidantly
attached children reveal dissociative symptoms throughout child-hood, which seem to remit as adulthood approaches.
147This project
is an ongoing study examining adaptation in an “at-risk” sample ofover 150 children and their families, who have been followed sincethe late 1970s (before the births of the children). These children wereconsidered to be at high risk for poor adaptational outcome due topoverty conditions and other factors, such as the youth of the moth-ers. In general, the findings from this study support the view thatinterpersonal relationships shape the way the mind develops. Spe -
cifically, the relationships that lead to avoidant attachments appear
to foster a dis-association among, or disavowal of, elements of men -
tal life.
148For example, the need for emotional connection is repeat -
edly met with frustration within the interpersonal matrix of avoid -
antly attached dyads.
Why would such an emotional climate produce a lack of access
to explicit autobiographical details of family life? Are these eventsencoded, but is access then blocked? Is there some different processof encoding in avoidantly attached children and in adults with dis -
missing states of mind with respect to attachment? Could it be that
the lack of emotion does not allow the relationship experiences to beencoded as “value-laden” memories, which are then more likely tobe recalled? Do these families not engage in the sorts of elaborativediscussions that would develop the contents of the children’s memo -
ries and imaginations more fully and enable them to express these96 THE DEVELOPING MIND

more readily? The answers to these questions are open for investiga -
tion.
These questions suggest a number of possible routes to the lack
of recall and lack of autobiographical narrative richness seen in dis -
missing and avoidant attachments. If future studies confirm their
validity, then they may also point the way to what approaches mightbe useful to enable reflection to develop in these individuals’ lives:emotionally involving, elaborative, and contingent communicationwith others. As noted briefly earlier, and as we’ll explore in the chap -
ters ahead, the region of the brain most central to attachment also
appears to be the primary mediator of autonoetic consciousness. Thisright orbitofrontal region serves the vital integrative function ofcoordinating social communication, empathic attunement, emotionalregulation, registration of bodily state, stimulus appraisal (the estab -
lishment of value and meaning of representations), and autonoetic
consciousness.
149These exciting convergent findings suggest a prelim-
inary view of how early emotional relationships shape self-knowl-edge and the capacity to integrate a coherent state of mind withrespect to attachment.
The assessment of AAI narratives examines how specific explicit
recollections correspond with generalized autobiographical themesand descriptions. In this way, the rater is able to uncover inconsisten-cies among the subjects’ episodic recall, their semantic knowledge,and the themes of their life stories. Life narratives are not merelyaccumulations of autobiographical detail, but are driven by bothexplicit memory and implicit recollections of repeated experiences.We’ve discussed in Chapter 2 how the themes of life stories may becreated by generalizations of the past (such as mental models), aswell as by nonconscious wishes for, and fantasies of, what couldhave been a more desired past. This reconstructive aspect of memorycan have strategically adaptive functions in creating a narrative senseof self that can serve to reduce anxiety about the actually livedpast.
150The “minimizing” strategy of the avoidant or dismissing
stance may produce very specific adaptations of the access to andfocus of autonoetic consciousness. As we’ll see next, the “maximiz -
ing” strategy of the ambivalent or preoccupied stance may also pro -
duce characteristic patterns of autonoetic consciousness in which
there is a blurring of past, present, and future representations duringthe AAI. Because autonoesis permits mental time travel, it caninvolve quite distinct dimensions of the experience of recollectionduring the challenging setting of the AAI.Attachment 97

Autobiographical memory can be conceptualized as being orga -
nized into three categories of recollection: general periods, general
knowledge, and specific events.151We can first think of our past in
general periods, such as “when I was in high school.” Next, we mayhave general autobiographical knowledge, such as the view that “Iwas good at basketball.” Finally, we may recall specific events fromour past, such as “when I was at that last game in basketball duringmy junior year in high school.” AAI narratives show that dismissingadults appear to lack recall for the details of specific relationship-related events in their lives.
This finding may be understood by viewing Wheeler, Stuss, and
Tulving’s notion of autonoetic consciousness as distinct from auto -
biographical memory.
152In particular, this distinction focuses on
autonoesis as the mind’s ability to perform mental time travel asdescribed in Chapter 2. Within the focus of autonoetic awareness isthe sense of the self in the personally experienced past. Memory forgeneral periods or general knowledge of events in one’s past can existas a part of autobiographical memory, but may be experienced onlywithin noetic consciousness: We may know that a past eventoccurred, but we do not have a sense of ourselves in the past. Thisfactual knowledge of even personal past events is recalled as asemantic (factual) recollection, rather than as part of the episodicprocess of mental time travel. In episodic recall, the self as experi-enced is represented in memory. The finding that differing brainstructures support autonoetic versus noetic recollection suggests thatthose with dismissing states of mind with respect to attachment mayin fact be utilizing differing neurological mechanisms in their narra -
tive recounting. Most individuals look to the left when recalling
autobiographical memories, a process thought to activate right-hemi -
sphere circuits predominantly.
153Do those with dismissing states of
mind look to the right side during the AAI—suggestive of the activa -
tion of the left hemisphere, where semantic recall is thought to be
mediated? Main and Hesse are currently examining the answer tothis question both with respect to the AAI and with respect to a self-visualization task conducted at Berkeley.
154
But some of those with dismissing states of mind insist on com -
plete lack of recall for personal events in their lives. Not only do they
appear not to recall themselves in the past; they do not seem even torecall the facts of experiences. Beyond mere autonoetic impairments,there appears to be a blockage in recall or impaired encoding of factsabout relationship-related experiences. To attempt to understand this98 THE DEVELOPING MIND

insistence on lack of recall, we can look toward the general studies of
memory and emotion, which suggest that emotionally charged expe -
riences are more likely to be remembered.155The parts of the brain
responsible for assigning priorities to incoming engrams, includingthe amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex, probably mediate this “red-flagging” of experiences as being value-laden, emotionally meaning -
ful and therefore memorable.
156Emotional experiences are more
likely to be remembered in the long term, suggesting that the corticalconsolidation process selects these memories above others for entryinto permanent storage. This may be the way in which our life sto -
ries come to contain emotionally meaningful themes and correspond -
ing supportive details.
157
Could it be that in avoidantly attached children, the lack of
emotional involvement keeps the amygdala, orbitofrontal cortex, andother appraisal centers from labeling relationship-related experiencesas worthy of recall? In one study, ten-year-olds who were found tobe avoidantly attached to their primary caregivers at one year of agewere also found to have a unique and marked paucity of autobio-graphical narrative detail.
158They would say things like “I don’t
know what to say about my life,” or “I live at home with mybrother; that’s about it.” Their dismissing parents had this samequality of minimal elaboration of their life stories, especially as thesepertained to relationships with other people.
If parents are uninterested in reflecting or unable to reflect upon
their children’s minds, then we can hypothesize that they may alsoprovide less elaboration via memory talk and co-construction of nar -
rative, both of which appear to be important in making memories
accessible. With these diminished mentalizing or reflective functions(thinking about the subjective experience of one’s own or another’smind), narrativization, autobiographical memory, and emotionalconnections with others, it may well be that these individuals’ subjec -
tive experience of life lacks a certain vitality shared by those in the
other attachment groups. Overall, self-awareness and autonoeticconsciousness itself may differ as a reflection of these differences indevelopmental experience.
Avoidant or dismissing attachment can be conceptualized as
involving restrictions in the flow of energy and information throughthe mind. Acquired from emotionally distant communication patterns,this pattern of attachment organizes the mind to reduce access to emo -
tional experience and information in memory. These restrictions impair
the mind’s ability to develop an integrated sense of the self across timeAttachment 99

in relationship to others. The view of the self is limited to nonemotional
domains, which are seen as quite independent of the influence of inter -
personal relationships. Although one can certainly argue that this is
just an “adaptation” to prior experience and not an impairment inmental functioning, an organization of the mind that excludes emotionand interpersonal relationships is quite inflexible. If one believes thatemotion and relationships play an important role in determining mean -
ing and mental health throughout the lifespan, then such a restrictive
approach to living in the world can be seen as an impairment to thehealthy functioning of the mind.
AMBIVALENT ATTACHMENTS
The second form of insecure attachment is called “resistant” or“ambivalent” (“C”). I prefer to use the term “ambivalent,” becauseit denotes the mixed and anxious feelings often associated with thisform of relationship. During the Strange Situation, ambivalentlyattached infants return to their parents upon reunion, but are noteasily soothed and do not quickly return to play. They cry, showrelief, then cry again; they appear difficult to console.
In their home observations during the first year of life, Ains-
worth and colleagues found that the parents in these dyads wereinconsistently available, sensitive, perceptive, and effective.
159Such a
parent would have moments of intrusiveness that appeared to beemotional invasions into the infant’s state of mind. These were gener -
ally not hostile in nature; a parent might suddenly grab a happily
playing child and shower him with excited hugs and kisses withoutwarning, disrupting the child’s focus of attention and state of mind.That is, the parent would try to be connected, but in a way that wasnot contingent to the child’s communication. In ambivalently at -
tached dyads, the parents’ emotions and mental states appear to
interfere repeatedly with the ability to consistently and accuratelyperceive those of their infants. As a result, the infants remain uncer -
tain whether their own emotional states and hence needs will be
attuned to and satisfied. Sometimes they will, sometimes they won’t.As Mary Main has suggested, this leads to an attentional/representa -
tional state that “maximizes” a focus on the attachment system.
160
Mental state resonance or alignment does occur in these dyads, but is
unpredictably available and is at times dominated by the parents’intrusion of their own states onto those of the children.100 THE DEVELOPING MIND

Each of us goes through cycles of needing connection with oth -
ers and needing to be left alone. These natural oscillations between
an external focus with communication to others and an internalfocus with periods of solitude are part of what sensitive caregiversperceive in the changing states of their children. Knowing when to gotoward a child (or adult) in an effort to communicate, versus know -
ing when to “back off” and give emotional space to another person,
is a fundamental part of attunement. In ambivalent attachments,there appears to be a significant inconsistency in the parents’ abilityto perceive and respect these natural cycles.
How do parents create an ambivalent attachment strategy in
their children? Examination of AAI findings (see below) reveals that“preoccupied” parents have significant intrusions within their ownnarratives of elements of the past that shape their experience in thepresent. Is there anyone for whom the past doesn’t shape the pres -
ent? Of course not; our minds are always automatically comparingpast experiences with present perceptions as we anticipate the next
moment in time. This comparing process is a natural outcome of theinterplay among memory, perception, and consciousness, and definesthe mind as an “anticipation machine.” However, the states that chil-dren evoke in us as parents create challenges beyond merelycognitively comparing forms of representations and matching ourexpectations. These parental states of mind are in fact responses tothe child’s behavior, some might argue. But are they contingent? Theissue is that with parents with a preoccupied stance toward attach-ment, their responses to the AAI and to their children’s behavior aredominated by their entanglements with their own past. Theirresponses to the external world are shaped intermittently by theirinternal mental processes, which are independent of the signals sentby their children.
In this way, an ambivalently attached child experiences inconsis -
tent parental sensitivity and has a degree of distress that is not reli -
ably soothed by the parent. Unlike the avoidantly attached child,
who learns to dismiss the mental state of the parent and develops adeactivating strategy, an ambivalent attachment forces the child to bemore preoccupied with her own distress
161and to maximize her
attention to the (unpredictable) attachment relationship.
One way of conceptualizing this finding is seen in Aitken and
Trevarthen’s discussion of intersubjectivity.162In this view, attuned
communication has an initial phase during the first few months inwhich there is a direct form of contingent communication betweenAttachment 101

infant and caregiver. This is called “primary intersubjectivity.” By
about nine months, the infant’s increasingly complex representationalcapacities allow for the development of an internal image of the par -
ent, which Aitken and Trevarthen call a “virtual other.” This is “sec -
ondary intersubjectivity,” in that now the infant (like the parent since
the beginning of their relationship) has the filtering process of per -
ceiving the other person and representing those perceptions in the
secondary process of a “virtual other” representation. This interme -
diate step is the normal way in which the mind connects the memory
of past experiences with ongoing perceptions. Beyond the first halfyear of life, we each have a set of “virtual others,” which are contin -
ually evoked during interactions with other people. If past attach -
ments have been filled with uncertainty and intrusion, then the vir -
tual other—the internal representation of the attachment figure—
may interfere with the ability to clearly perceive others’ bids for con -
nection. The individual may (mis)perceive others’ behaviors in lightof a virtual other that creates caution and uncertainty.
Daniel Stern has described in detail the ways in which such
interactions become represented and generalized in the infant’smind.
163These generalizations form the building blocks of the inter-
nal working models. As Main has clarified Bowlby’s original mean-ing, parenting that generates multiple, contradictory models ofattachment creates a sense of insecurity.
164In the Strange Situation,
the child is not easily soothed by the return of a parent who, in thisparticular setting, may be acting in a perfectly attuned and comfort-ing manner. The past, encoded within the child’s memory, directlyshapes both the implicit mental models and the “evocative memory”that creates the image of the virtual other in the child’s mind duringinteractions. As Main has noted, insecure attachment is generated bymultiple “incoherent” models of attachment.
165We can propose that
these processes are state-dependent and can be activated in certainmood states (such as feeling threatened) or within interactions withspecific people. The virtual other can be so dominant in an individ -
ual’s mind that an actual other has little chance of being directly and
accurately perceived. Informal observations suggest that for the childof such a person, the sense of being “unseen” or “absent” may fillmany interactions and create a sense of a “false self.” The result isthat this attachment history shapes the child’s perceptions and expec -
tations of the world, others, and the self in the direction of ambiva -
lence.
The ambivalently attached child has learned that his own
mental state may be intruded upon by the parent in unpredictable102 THE DEVELOPING MIND

ways. The flow of energy and information within the child will be
unpredictably disrupted rather than predictably enhanced by com -
munication with the parent. Nevertheless, the developing child
needs to have the attachment figure psychologically accessible inorder to feel secure. Ironically, the ambivalently attached child isleft with an internal sense of uncertainty, which gives him an evenmore urgent and continuing need for comfort from external inter -
actions. In this way, the unpredictable and intrusive patterns of
communication have established ambivalence in the child’s self-reg -
ulatory capacities. Combined with the parent’s own continuing pre -
occupations and inconsistent sensitivity to the child’s signals, the
dance of (mis)attuned communication in such a dyad continues toreinforce the intense, inconsistent, and intrusive nature of thealignment of states of mind.
ADULT PREOCCUPIED STATE OF MIND
WITH RESPECT TO ATTACHMENT:
INTRUSION OF THE PAST UPON
THE PRESENT
“We were a close-knit family. We used to play all the time, have
fun, walk around. There were never any times when thingsbecame too loud, or sometimes they would. But it was OK.One time we went to Disneyland with my uncle. It was a lot offun. But last week my parents took my brother’s kids there andthey didn’t even call us. Why they do this, I don’t know. Itdoesn’t bother me now, but it does. I mean it did. I think. Iwish they would stop favoring him over me; but I’m throughcaring about it, I’m through with the whole thing. When will itstop?”
The person just quoted was responding to the direct request, “Tell
me about your family from your earliest memories.” Her accountreveals an adult with an AAI classification of “preoccupied” (codedas “E”; think of “entangled”) state of mind with respect to attach -
ment.
166The narrative indicates that the past is emerging into this
adult’s present. The response to the question about early memoriesbegins to include issues about current relationships that contain overthostility, fear, and passivity. According to Main and Goldwyn, thelinguistic analysis reveals the violation of the discourse maxims ofquantity, manner, and relevance:
167The narrative is not succinct andAttachment 103

does not directly address the interviewer’s queries. Individuals like
this woman have easy access to a flood of memories of their child -
hood, which begin to blend with the reality (directly stated or not)
that their past childhood experiences with their parents still activelyand profoundly influence their lives in the present.
Preoccupied adults’ contradictory models of attachment include
concerns that their attachment figures may or may not be able tomeet their needs. There is simultaneously a powerful wish for close -
ness and at times a disabling fear of losing it. This preoccupied state
is filled with emotional turmoil centering around attachment-relatedissues. Mental models of relationships will bias present perceptionsand expectations, as we have seen, in such a way that these personsmay create their own worst nightmare of uncertainty in their rela -
tionships with others, including their own children. The inconsistent
emotional availability and intrusiveness of these adults can be seen asresulting from their preoccupation with previous attachments. UsingAitken and Trevarthen’s model of the virtual other, I would proposethat one way of conceptualizing this preoccupation is that the virtualother of an adult’s attachment figure is so dominant that it distortsthe parent’s ability to perceive the child directly. In this way, the childmay be repeatedly seen through the filter of the parent’s preoccupa-tions with the dominant virtual other, and thus may be at risk ofdeveloping a sense of inauthenticity within the parent–child relation-ship. As noted above, such a process may encourage the developmentof a sense of a “false self” in the child. In this manner, both parentand child become filled with representations of the self and of theother that interfere with contingent, collaborative communication.Their inner worlds may each be dominated by intrusive emotionalconcerns (“Am I loved enough? Will I be abandoned?”), which willbe activated within a variety of relationships.
A parent’s emotional turmoil and preoccupations with the past
and with his own mental state can create repeated patterns of incon -
sistent attunements with his child. Preoccupations with the past dom -
inating the parenting pattern may also repeatedly lead to an adult’s
relating to a child as if the child were a mirror of himself at an ear -
lier age. In this way, entanglements with his own childhood intrude
on the way he relates to his child. This may be especially true in oneparticular subcategory of this adult classification, “preoccupied/over -
whelmed by trauma,” in which the AAI reveals frequent references
to past traumatic experiences.
168Though these repeated references are
not disoriented, they do reveal that the adult continues to have thetrauma intrude upon his narrative discourse.104 THE DEVELOPING MIND

In ambivalently attached children and their preoccupied parents,
mental models of the self with others are full of leaky boundariesbetween past and present. The adults’ experience becomes influencedby activations of models of insecure attachment from their ownchildhoods. As perception and emotional meaning are establishedthrough the filter of this uncertainty, a self-fulfilling prophecy is cre -
ated: New relationships are again experienced as inconsistent and
unreliable. Emotional joining or connecting is a longed-for butinconsistently achieved goal in the minds of ambivalently attachedindividuals.
A parent’s preoccupation with her own past—for example, how
she felt abandoned by her mother or how her father was disap -
pointed in her—can continually intrude itself onto her present per -
ceptions. Being with a child can produce the most intense entangle -
ments with these images and ideas from the past within the parent’s
mind. The parent enters an old state of mind and can become filledwith sensations of fear, rejection, disappointment, or anger, whichcolor her experiences with her own child. The parent often remainsunaware of how disabling this preoccupation with the past is to herfunctioning as an effective parent in the present.
In memory terms, such parents are being “primed” to recall
their childhood experiences in two fundamental ways. Priming is anormal part of memory, in which elements become more likely to beretrieved following certain contextual cues.
169For preoccupied par-
ents, the context of being with children who may share some of thefeatures of their own childhoods (for example, shyness or beingrejected by the mother) creates a context in which the parents beginto relive their own childhood struggles. Marital difficulties can alsoevoke emotional states that tend to reinstate old memories. Forexample, a father may feel a sense of rejection because of his wife’spossibly distant, emotionless pattern of relating, which then creates amental state within him that resembles the rejected, frustrated stateof mind of his youth. His wife’s interest in a child may also evoke asense of rejection resembling the feeling of the birth of a sibling inthe father’s own childhood history.
“State-dependent” memory is a term referring to the way in
which events encoded in particular mental states will be more likelyto be recalled if a person is in a similar state in the future.
170This
normal feature of memory is prominent throughout life and is partic -
ularly relevant to how being a parent can induce states resembling
those of one’s youth. This happens in everyone, regardless of attach -
ment history. But how these memories are experienced may vary con -Attachment 105

siderably with attachment history. For example, preoccupied parents
may be flooded with emotional and behavioral responses withinimplicit memory. They may begin to remember, both explicitly andimplicitly, particular aspects of memories from their own childhoodsas they raise their children through the various stages of develop -
ment. Explicit recollections may return in the form of facts about
child-rearing or other autobiographical events, or general knowledgefrom the past. Implicit recall may take the form of many componentsof “personality,” including learned behavioral responses, emotionalreactions, mental models, attitudes and beliefs, perceptual images,and possibly internal bodily sensations. The activation of implicitmemory by itself does not involve a sense of recollection. When situ -
ations activate implicit memories without their explicit counterparts,
parents merely act, feel, perceive, or sense in the here-and-now.These implicit recollections are not usually subject to a process ofself-reflection, as in “Why am I doing this or feeling this way?” Indi-viduals may sense these experiences as just defining who they are.
There is a direct connection between how past experiences have
shaped implicit memory and how they are reactivated in the settingof being with a child. If parents do not recognize this link, then theyare at risk of enacting, without conscious awareness, learned behav-iors and emotional responses that will dominate their actions andcreate their children’s attachment experiences. If these implicit mem-ories are of healthy forms of relating, then the outcome will be asecure attachment. If instead the parents had less than optimal expe-riences, without self-reflective work they may be at risk of passing oneither imitated patterns or adaptations to these relationships, whichwill keep their children from experiencing a dependable emotionalcloseness (which secure attachments require).
Preoccupied attachment can be described as reflecting an impair -
ment in the flow of information and energy in attachment-related
contexts. The intrusion of information (memory) from the past intopresent situations impairs an adult’s ability to have contingent, col -
laborative communication with a child. We can propose here that
one mechanism by which this intrusion of memory influences socialcommunication is within the integrating circuits of the orbitofrontalregion, described earlier. As autonoetic consciousness mediates themind’s ability to travel through time—to experience the self in thepast, present, and future—then the settings of the AAI, emotionalrelationships, or ongoing parenting experiences may evoke attach -
ment-related contexts that activate the orbitofrontal cortex’s retrieval
of autonoetic representations. For the preoccupied state of mind,106 THE DEVELOPING MIND

autonoetic awareness then evokes a range of intense mental represen -
tations that slip easily into this state of roving among past, present,
and future preoccupations. This may be how the characteristic AAIpattern is created.
The orbitofrontal region also specifically mediates the perception
of emotional signals and social cognition. The dual tasks of theAAI
171(as described by Hesse)—to carry out collaborative and coher -
ent discourse while searching for memory—may be particularly chal -
lenging to the orbitofrontal region in insecure states of mind with
respect to attachment. For the preoccupied state, such a challengemay lead to a flood of episodic representations, which can be postu -
lated to impair the emotional perception and social cognition func -
tions of this same region. Furthermore, within the context of parent -
ing, such flooding may also impair the capacity of the orbitofrontal
region to mediate sensitivity to the child’s signals, to achieve attunedcommunication, and to regulate emotional states within the parent—the processes that ordinarily allow a child to achieve consistent andpredictable social referencing. In an ambivalently attached dyad,these processes, in which the child looks to the parent’s often nonver-bal responses to “know how to feel,”
172are inconsistently useful in
helping the child learn to regulate her own internal states. Thesetransactions may be at the core of the inconsistency and intrusivenessof the ambivalently attached child’s experience with the preoccupiedparent.
In such a dyad, the energy arousal often associated with the
flooding of intense emotional states onto interpersonal interactionscan be seen as an impairment in the flow of energy both within themind of the parent and in its interactions with other minds. Theintrusion of mental representations from the past will also influencethe direct perception and representation of the child’s signals. Pat -
terns of the flow of energy and information from past experiences
intrude onto the natural collaborative flow of the preoccupied stateof mind interacting in the present with other minds.
DISORGANIZED/DISORIENTED
ATTACHMENTS
After reunion following separations, a one-and-a-half-year-old girl
would seek her father’s attention and get on his lap, but continued tocry and did not return readily to play. This behavior was quite dis -Attachment 107

tinct from her secure attachment to her mother, in which she sought
proximity and then was easily soothed and then returned to explora -
tion in the room. Unfortunately, the Strange Situation for this young
girl and her father revealed more than these elements of an ambiva -
lent attachment. When he returned to the room, she first got up from
playing and moved toward the wall, away from him; then sheseemed to walk toward him, but with her gaze focused in the oppo -
site direction from where she was walking. Main and Solomon clas -
sified this type of approach–avoidance during the Strange Situation
with a parent as disorganized/disoriented (“D”), with a primary orbest-fitting alternative classification of ambivalently attached.
173
During the reunion in the Strange Situation, an infant with a dis -
organized/disoriented attachment (“D”) frequently exhibits chaotic
and/or disoriented behavior.174Examples of this may include first
going toward the mother or father and then backing away. In moresevere cases, children may go in circles, fall down, enter trance-likestates of “freezing,” or avert their gaze and rock back and forth. Inthe first year of life, these dyads are characterized by unusual formsof communication from the caregiver. This communication has thequality of a “paradoxical injunction.”
175“Come here and go away”
is a mild version of this conflictual communication. These communi-cations present a child with an unsolvable and problematic situation.Main and Hesse have proposed that these dyadic interactions involv-ing parental frightened, disoriented, or frightening behaviors towardthe infant are inherently disorganizing.
176They are disruptive to an
organized strategy because the infant cannot make sense of the inter -
nally generated and confusing parental responses. Furthermore, the
child cannot use the parent to become soothed or oriented, becausethe parent is in fact the source of the fear or disorientation. There isno organized adaptation available for the child. The internal state ofmind is thought to lack internal coherence, because the attachmentsystem is such that the caregiver is intended to confer safety to thechild. Hesse has pointed out that disorganized attachment is seen inmany situations that do not involve abuse in which parents exhibitfrightened, dissociated, or disoriented behavior.
177
At another extreme, however, are children who experience phys -
ical, sexual, or emotional abuse who also develop disorganized/dis -
oriented attachments. In one clinical study of these high-risk,
parentally maltreated infants, disorganized attachment was found inabout eighty percent; in another study, in the context of home inter -
vention, the incidence was fifty-five percent.
178In this setting, a child108 THE DEVELOPING MIND

experiences fear or terror of the attachment figure, not just loss of
the ability in the moment to use the attachment figure as an orientingand soothing haven of safety. When this parent returns, the infantexperiences a bind in which the feeling of fear cannot be modulatedby the very source of that fear. Without the option to fight or flee,stuck between approach and avoidance,
179the infant can only
“freeze” into a trance-like stillness, which may be the beginnings of atendency toward clinical dissociation—the phenomena in which con -
sciousness, states of mind, and information processing become frag -
mented.
180The parental behavior of either abuse (frightening) or sud -
den shifts into mental states independent of the child’s signals
(frightened or disoriented) are thought to be the mediators of disor -
ganized/disoriented attachment.181
Children with disorganized/disoriented attachment have been
found to have the most difficulty later in life with emotional, social,and cognitive impairments.
182These children also have the highest
likelihood of having clinical difficulties in the future,183including
affect regulation problems, social difficulties, attentional problems,and (as suggested just above) dissociative symptomatology. Unlikethe other forms of insecure attachment, which are “organized”approaches to the pattern of parental communication, this form ofinsecure attachment appears to involve significant problems in thedevelopment of a coherent mind. The sudden shifts in these chil-dren’s states of mind yield incoherence in their cognitive, emotional,and behavioral functioning. Their social interactions become im-paired. Studies have found that these children may become hostileand aggressive with their peers. They tend to develop a controllingstyle of interaction that makes social relationships difficult. Thesepeer interactions in the school-age child often occur when the child ishaving continuing difficulties in the home environment that engenderunsolvable paradoxes or overwhelming feelings without solution.Disorganized attachment has been associated with serious familydysfunction, such as impaired ability to negotiate conflicts, chronicand severe maternal depression, child maltreatment, and parentalcontrolling, helpless, and coercive behaviors.
184As the children
develop and continue to have such experiences, the recursive aspectof mental development suggests that they will reinforce the veryincoherence that is creating their difficulties. Disorienting relation -
ships create internal disorganization that in turn impairs future inter -
actions with others, which disorganize the development of the mind
still further.Attachment 109

In these dyadic situations, the child has the double trauma of
experiencing terrifying events and the loss of a trusted attachmentfigure. Terrifying experiences that have occurred early in life, duringthe normal period of infantile amnesia (before explicit episodic mem -
ory is available), will be processed in only an implicit manner. If such
experiences occur later in life, then the family denial and lack ofmemory talk can impair explicit recall after the traumatic event,which in turn may impair the consolidation process and preventexperiences from becoming a part of permanent explicit autobio -
graphical (narrative) memory.
185Instead, these events may remain in
an unresolved, unconsolidated form. In this state, they may be morelikely to influence implicit recollections automatically, creating ele -
ments of emotional, behavioral, perceptual, and perhaps somatic
reactions without conscious awareness of their origins.
186The ability
of the mind to integrate these aspects of memory is severely impairedin unresolved trauma and in disorganized/disoriented attachments,leading to dissociative tendencies and incoherence of mind.
ADULT UNRESOLVED/DISORGANIZED STATE
OF MIND WITH RESPECT TO ATTACHMENT:
INCOHERENT LIFE STORIES AND ABRUPT
SHIFTS IN STATES OF MIND
In Main and Goldwyn’s adult attachment studies, episodes of
marked disorganization and disorientation in reasoning or discourseduring attempted discussions of loss or abuse in the AAI lead toassignment of the transcript to unresolved/disorganized status. AsMain and Hesse first discovered, unresolved parents tend to haveinfants whose Strange Situation behavior is disorganized.
187A meta-
analysis conducted by van IJzendoorn has shown that across a fullset of existing studies, a child with a disorganized attachment (D)indeed often has a parent with an AAI classification of “unresolved”trauma or grief/disorganized (coded as “U/d”).
188As with the child
classification, the adult is also given a primary, best-fitting alternativeadult classification (F, Ds, or E; see Table 2, left side).
An example of disorientation or disorganization during an inter -
view includes an individual’s referring to a deceased person as if she
was still alive (loss) or becoming confused and disoriented when dis -
cussing fearful experiences with a parent (trauma).
189Examples of110 THE DEVELOPING MIND

narrative findings notclassified as unresolved would be a person’s
crying during the interview or stating that the subject matter is toopainful and he does not wish to discuss the topic. These latter twoexamples reveal that the emotional pain of the loss or trauma canstill be active and available to the person’s conscious mind, but theperson is not showing signs of discourse disorientation or disorgani -
zation. In this view, unresolved trauma or loss is defined as being
reflected in a disruption in the representational processes necessaryfor coherent discourse.
190We can propose that the mind’s ability to
integrate various aspects of representations within memory into acoherent whole is impaired in unresolved states. The orbitofrontalcortex can be hypothesized to be playing a central role in suchimpairments in integration.
191Abrupt shifts in state of mind, intrusive
“dissociated” elements of implicit and explicit memory, transientblockages in the capacity to carry out collaborative social communi -
cation, and difficulty maintaining a fluid flow in consciousnessacross these processes may be at the root of unresolved states of
mind as assessed in the AAI.
192
If one examines the incidence of loss or of trauma alone (and
not the indicators of its lack of resolution), there is little statisticalcorrelation with the disorganized attachment status of offspring orwith any other developmental feature.
193It appears that the AAI is
uniquely eliciting this usually unstudied feature of unresolved loss,and that it is unresolved loss, not loss itself, which leads to disorga-nized infant response patterns. Lack of resolution of traumatic eventsor loss from the past directly affects emotional experience.
194Hesse
and Main have emphasized the role of unintegrated fear in the lapsesin reasoning or discourse observed in the speaker.
195Unresolved trau -
ma or grief creates pain and suffering in both these individuals and
their children; for this reason, helping people resolve trauma andgrief is of vital importance for present and future generations. Failureto identify lack of resolution can permit dysfunction to continueacross the generations within the devastating effects of disorganizedattachment. Again, these children have a marked inability to regulateemotional responses and the flow of states of mind establishing atendency toward dissociation, disruptive behaviors, impairments inattention and cognition, and compromised coping capacities, as wellas a vulnerability toward posttraumatic stress disorder.
196
It is clear that there may in fact be many individuals who do
have unresolved grief or trauma, but whose AAI narratives may notreveal this as disorganization in discourse. It is assumed that the per -Attachment 111

centages of subjects placed in the unresolved category may actually
represent underestimates of the prevalence of lack of resolution. Inspite of this unavoid able procedural limitation, the unresolved cate -
gory has a robust correlation with the group of infants with disorga -
nized/disoriented attachments.
197
One father revealed a marked disorientation during discussions
about his own father’s alcoholism. This incoherence in his narrativesuggests unresolved trauma. When asked about times when he mayhave felt threatened by his parents, he stated:
“I know I didn’t like my mother’s depression, but I don’t think I
felt threatened by it. She would be OK sometimes, other timesnot. I think I was mostly disappointed and sad. About myfather, well, that is a different sort of thing. I try not to thinkabout it much. He is always unpredictable, though I think hecan control himself, though sometimes he can’t, and I couldn’tfigure out when he would, so I don’t, I mean I couldn’t, knowhow to deal with him . . . [twenty-second pause]. There werethings that would happen . . . [seventeen-second pause]. Andthey weren’t very fun, I mean they were scary. Yes, I feel fright-ened. He is very big, and very threatening. Yes.”
Note the use of the present tense to describe the past—a sign of dis-
orientation. The incomplete sentences and prolonged pauses inspeech are other signals of cognitive disorganization. During this partof the interview, something was happening in this father’s mind thatwas incompletely processed and was impairing his usual ability totell a coherent story while searching for memories.
198
Disorganizedly attached children and their parents with unre -
solved trauma or grief each have the potential to activate incoherent,
conflictual, or unstable mental models. Abrupt shifts in states ofmind can occur within these individuals, leading to a disorganizedform of behavior externally and to the experience of a dissociation inconsciousness internally. AAI narratives such as the one above revealbreaks in the normal flow of communication—both in the extendedpauses without explanation and in the incoherent content of dis -
course. Unresolved traumatic experiences or unresolved grief over
loss of a loved one can be revealed through this disorganization innarrative flow.
A young infant, attempting to make sense of the world, is partic -
ularly vulnerable to a parent who has abrupt shifts in his own state
of mind. These state shifts are primarily functions of the internal112 THE DEVELOPING MIND

processes of unresolved trauma or grief, rather than directly contin -
gent and hence predictable responses to the child’s own behavior.
The child’s capacity to anticipate the parent’s behavior is severelyimpaired, and expectations, mediated via mental models, cannot becreated in an organized manner. As the two individuals interact, thechild’s state attempts to align with the shifting sands of the parent’srapid changes. With these noncontingent shifts, the child’s mind maybe unable to develop smooth transitions and will continue to haveabrupt and at times chaotic shifts in state, which are ordinarily seenprimarily during the first year of life. States of mind begin to havesignificantly smoother transitions by the second year unless mitigat -
ing factors, such as frightening or conflictual parental responses, pre -
vent this developmental milestone.
199Furthermore, the child may
begin to take on a disorganized state as a learned, engrained,repeated pattern of neuronal activations. The child learns to recreatethe parent’s incoherent behavior by attuning to the chaotic shifts inparental state.
Parental lack of resolution may explain the findings that, as
Hesse and Main have hypothesized
200and as several researchers have
recently demonstrated,201these parents may behave with fear or fear-
inducing actions that are conflictual and confusing.202Their children
cannot incorporate an organized approach to this behavior. Parentallack of resolution of trauma or loss involving an attachment figurecan produce future disorganization in these parents’ minds as well astheir actions. The conditions that elicit such shifts may include ques-tions about the topic (as in the AAI), or relationship contexts thatresemble those of the adults when they were children with their ownattachment figures. Examples of the latter include many crucialmoments in parenting, such as setting limits, tuning in to a child’sdistress, responding to a child’s testing of limits, and negotiating bed -
time and other separations. Hesse and van IJzendoorn have found
that in a nonclinical sample of young adults, individuals whose par -
ents had experienced the loss of a child or another loved one within
two years of their own birth tended to have higher rates of “absorp -
tion,” one element of dissociative reactions.
203Loss in a caregiver
around the time of raising an infant may be less likely to have beenresolved at that time, and these findings support the view that suchlack of resolution may contribute to the development of disorganizedattachment and the tendency to dissociate.
Parental confusion, internal conflict, intrusive emotional memo -
ries, rapid shifts in state of mind, overt trance states in response toAttachment 113

stress, and difficulty with their own and their children’s affect regula -
tion are some of the fear-inducing and confusing parental elements
that may directly produce disorganized/disoriented attachment in thechildren. For example, with the father whose AAI was describedabove, abrupt shifts into dramatically different states of mind wouldoften occur when he initially felt rejected, either by his wife or by hisdaughter. He described the experience as if something would thenhappen that would activate a “crazy feeling”—as if “something wasabout to pop.” He would sense a pressure in his head and a trem -
bling in his arms. He would feel that he was going out of his mind,
ready to explode, “receding from the world,” and drawing awayfrom people as if in a tunnel. At this moment he could no longerstop the process. He knew that his face looked enraged and tightlydrawn, and that the muscles in his body were stiff. Sometimes hewould hit his daughter. Sometimes he would squeeze her arm. Othertimes he would just yell at her, at the top of his lungs, filled with arage he could not control.
The father tried to deny his repeated and sudden shifts into a
frightening rageful state. He felt so ashamed of these outbursts thathe did not engage in any repair process with his daughter during orafter such terrifying interactions. These repeated discontinuities with-out repair in their communication produced a mental model in her ofa confusing and unreliable relationship with her father. Her implicitmemories of these frightening experiences might emerge as she grewolder and be revealed as sudden shifts in her own state of mind,behavioral responses toward others, bursts of rage, or images of herenraged father. She might have the general sense that whenever sheneeded something, others might become irritated and betray her.
Such parental behaviors as these reflect parents’ unresolved trau -
matic experiences from their own childhoods. How does this occur?
Traumatic experiences often involve a threat to the physical or
psychological integrity of the victim.
204If the traumatizing individual
is someone in a position of trust, such as a parent, relative, friend, orteacher, then the sense of betrayal can play an important role in themeaning of the experience(s). As a child, the father described abovewas repeatedly subjected to the alcoholic outbursts of a drunk andangry father. His withdrawn mother was unavailable to protect him,and he was vulnerable to his father’s unpredictable whims. The sonlearned that these sudden shifts in his father could be anticipatedfrom the amount of alcohol the father had consumed. He wouldkeep a vigilant eye on how much his father drank each night. If it114 THE DEVELOPING MIND

was too much, his father would pass out. If it were just a little, he
would get berated. If it were “just the right amount,” he would be atrisk of being chased and beaten.
When this man grew up and had a daughter, and the daughter
would insist on things being done her way (as children often do), hefound it difficult to be flexible. Her irritation with him (also a nor -
mal childhood response) was felt by him as a rejection, and set off
the patterns of abrupt shifts in his state of mind and the enragedreactions that established the disorganized pattern of attachment.What happened after that was a sign of an unresolved traumaticexperience, which we can hypothesize involved the father’s presentexperience with the intrusive elements of his past. The perception ofhis daughter’s irritation with him induced a shift in his mental state.In memory terms, his present perception of her irritation was repre -
sented in his mind as a perceptual representation, or engram. This
engram became linked with other representations connected with theperception of an irritated face. We can conceptualize these as part ofthe virtual other from his own childhood. For the father, these link-ages included the emotional representation of feeling rejected and theassociated implicit memories from past experiences: behavioralimpulses to flee, perceptual images of his enraged father or depressedmother, and bodily sensations of tension and perhaps pain. Theselinkages were made quickly and out of his awareness. He did not feelthat he was recalling anything. As implicit memories, they wereexperienced in the here-and-now, as part of his present reality. Theseimplicit processes created his subjective world and organized hisinternal experiences.
In those crucial moments in which his perception of his daugh -
ter’s response initiated a cascade of implicit memory activations, he
would become flooded with an emotional response that rapidlyshifted his state of mind.
205This sudden shift could be a sign of a dis -
continuous experience of the flow of consciousness—in other words,
dissociation. At times, such a shift might appear as the entrance intoa frozen, trance-like state of mind. At other times, this shift mightreveal the sudden onset of explosive rage. The father described thesensation of feeling that he was going out of his mind, that he wasabout to explode. In this situation, he was overwhelmed withimplicit memories and suddenly shifted into a childhood mental statefilled with that old and all too familiar sense of rejection, fear, anger,and despair. His sense of impotence and disconnection was experi -
enced as shame. His subsequent perception of his daughter’s irrita -Attachment 115

tion as anger at him induced a feeling of humiliation within himself.
Before he could pull himself out of this avalanche, he would becomeenraged. In this altered, dissociated state, he would behave in a wayterrifying to his daughter, which he would never ordinarily choose todo. He was, literally, out of control.
This father’s repeated entry into these states of mind as a child had
allowed these states to become engrained in his neural networks. Thesewere dreaded states, filled with shame and humiliation—painful, des -
pairing, imprisoning and terrifying. States of mind that are repeatedly
activated can become traits of an individual.
206The unresolved nature
of this man’s traumatic experiences placed him at risk of uncontrolledentry into these dreaded states. This disorganization in his internalexperience was now directly shaping his interactions with his daughter,who in turn was beginning to experience the disorganization of herown internal world. Therapeutic work with this family would requirean understanding of these rapid shifts in states and their connection topatterns of relationships from the past. If we can help those with unre-solved trauma heal, then we can alter the cycle of intergenerationaltransmission of relationship disturbances—a cycle that produces andperpetuates devastating emotional suffering.
RUPTURE AND REPAIR
Repeated and expectable patterns of interpersonal connection be-tween a child and an attachment figure are necessary for properdevelopment. There are always times of disconnection, which can befollowed by repair and reconnection. In each of the forms of insecureattachment, there is a problem with connection and repair. In theavoidantly attached dyad, connections are consistently infrequentand unsoothing; there is no repair. In the ambivalently attacheddyad, connections are unpredictable and at times overwhelming andemotionally intrusive. There is inconsistent respect for the cycling ofneeds for interaction versus solitude. Repair in these situations maybe overstimulating, such as an intrusive parent’s wanting to reestab -
lish a connection and not letting the infant avert his gaze as a means
of regulating his level of arousal/distress. Parents who persist at try -
ing to make direct contact or alignment when attunement actually
calls for them to back away from such efforts will overwhelm theirchildren and teach them that there is no reliable comfort in connec -
tion with the parents.116 THE DEVELOPING MIND

In a dyad with disorganized/disoriented attachment, interactions
can be a source of overwhelming terror and despair, going wellbeyond misattunement or missed opportunity for connection orrepair. In this case, the child is left in an overaroused state of distresswithout any comfort from the caregiver, who is in fact the source ofdistress. Disorganized attachment develops from repeated experi -
ences in which the caregiver appears frightened or frightening to the
child. As Lyons-Ruth and Jacobwitz have recently observed,
207repair
in such a dyad after these interactions does not occur. Often follow -
ing such frightening encounters, the parent may be so disoriented or
in denial that the child is not given the opportunity to experiencerepair. The child remains frozen, in a state of disconnection, andwith the overwhelming feelings of terror that have created such alarge and frightening distance between child and parent.
REFLECTIONS: ATTACHMENT
AND MENTAL HEALTH
It is amazing that such a complex process as interpersonal communica-
tion and parent–child relationships can actually be understood in afairly simple manner: Attachment at its core is based on parental sensi-tivity and responsivity to the child’s signals, which allow for collabora-tive parent–child communication. Contingent communication givesrise to secure attachment and is characterized by a collaborative give-and-take of signals between the members of the pair. Contingent com -
munication relies on the alignment of internal experiences, or states of
mind, between child and caregiver. This mutually sharing, mutuallyinfluencing set of interactions—this emotional attunement or mentalstate resonance—is the essence of healthy, secure attachment.
Suboptimal attachments arise with repeated patterns of non -
contingent communication. A parent’s communication and own
internal states may be oblivious to the child’s, as in avoidant attach -
ment. In contrast, an ambivalently attached child experiences the
parent’s communication as inconsistently contingent; at times it isintrusive, and yet at other times there is an alignment of their inter -
nal states. If the parent is a source of disorientation or terror, the
child will develop a disorganized/disoriented attachment. In such adyad, not only is communication noncontingent, but the messagessent by the parent create an internal state of chaos and overwhelm -
ing fear of the parent within the child.Attachment 117

These characteristics of the relationship with a child are features
that emerge in specific relation to each parent. Furthermore, a par -
ent’s “state of mind with respect to attachment” is the most powerful
predictor of how the parent–child relationship will evolve. The nar -
rative process of the AAI reveals characteristic ways in which par -
ents’ coherent or incoherent states of mind are associated with their
secure or insecure attachment to their children, respectively. The AAIfinding of an “earned” secure/autonomous status is an importantpoint for our understanding of coherent functioning. In some cases,therapeutic and personal relationships appear to be able to moveindividuals from an incoherent to a more integrated functioning ofthe mind. The fact that these adults are capable of sensitive, attunedcaregiving of their children, even under stress, suggests that this“earned” status is more than just being able to “talk the talk”; theycan also “walk the walk” of being emotionally connected with theirown children, despite not having such experiences in their own child-hoods. We may serve a vital role for this and future generations inenabling each other to achieve the more reflective, integrated func-tioning that facilitates secure attachments.
We can also propose that a transforming attuned relationship
would involve the following fundamental elements: contingent, col-laborative communication; psychobiological state attunement; mutu-ally shared interactions that involve the amplification of positiveaffective states and the reduction of negative ones; reflection on men-tal states; and the ensuing development of mental models of securitythat enable emotional modulation and positive expectancies forfuture interactions.
In those adults whose early life probably included a predominance
of emotional neglect and rejection, a dismissing stance toward attach -
ment may be found. These adults often have relationships with their
children marked by avoidant attachments. Communication appears tohave little sensitivity to signals or emotional attunement. The innerworld of such adults seems to function with independence as its ban -
ner—living free from the entanglements of interpersonal intimacy, and
perhaps from the emotional signals from their own bodies. Their nar -
ratives reflect this isolation, characterized by the specific finding of
insisting that they do not recall their childhood experiences. Life islived without a sense that the past or others contribute to the evolvingnature of the self.
In those adults who probably experienced inconsistently avail -
able caregiving and intrusive emotional communication, there is a118 THE DEVELOPING MIND

preoccupied stance toward attachment filled with anxiety, uncer -
tainty, and ambivalence. The children of these adults experience these
preoccupied states as often impairing their parents’ ability to perceivetheir needs consistently. Mental models of others may create a senseof caution about impending loss or intrusion from others. The resultfor the inner experience of these adults is to be perpetually over -
whelmed by doubts and fears about relying upon others. Their AAI
narratives are marked by intrusions of these past states upon theirability to focus clearly on the present. These narrative intrusions arereflections of the shifting emotional states that impair their ability tohave consistent contingent communication with their own children.In this way, what they may have learned from inconsistent and intru -
sive experiences is laid down directly within their pattern of relating
to others and within their own narrative process.
Finally, we have discussed how parental lack of resolution of
trauma or loss has been demonstrated by attachment research to be amajor factor associated with the most disturbed child form of attach-ment, disorganization/disoriented. Examining the nature of memoryprocesses makes it possible to begin to address this basic question:What does lack of resolution truly mean for the functioning of thehuman mind? Answering this question is of pressing concern, giventhe impairment that these adults and their offspring may come toexperience. These parents appear to enter rapid shifts into states ofmind that are terrifying to their children. In studies of posttraumaticstress disorder, those individuals who utilize dissociative mechanisms(entering into altered states of mind) during and after a traumaappear to be those most likely to suffer later disability.
208Understand -
ing how unresolved trauma or loss relates to the dis-association of
various processes from one another, including explicit from implicitmemory, is essential to gain insight into what later may become terri -
fying parental behaviors.
The individuals at greatest risk of developing significant psychi -
atric disturbances are those with disorganized/disoriented attach -
ments and unresolved trauma or grief. From our conceptualization
of the developing mind and mental health, these attachments involvethe most profound disturbances in how the self is able to organizethe information and modulate the energy of emotional states. At amost basic level, these individuals appear to have the most seriouslyimpaired capacity to integrate coherence within the mind. They arenot able to create a sense of unity and continuity of the self acrossthe past, present, and future, or in the relationship of the self withAttachment 119

others. This impairment reveals itself in the emotional instability,
social dysfunction, poor response to stress, and cognitive disorgani -
zation and disorientation that characterize both children and adults
in this attachment grouping. As we’ve discussed, children with disor -
ganized attachment tend to become controlling in their behaviors
with others and may be hostile and aggressive with their peers. Dis -
organized attachment in children and unresolved/disoriented attach -
ment in adults has been proposed by a number of authors to predis -
pose these individuals to violent behavior.209Finding ways as a
society to identify these high-risk individuals and help them to healtheir unresolved trauma and repair the devastating effects of suchchaotic attachment histories may enable us to help them developmore coherent internal function and more socially adaptive andrewarding interpersonal relationships.
The inability to integrate a sense of self and of the self with oth -
ers across time may be due to the disorganization in a more funda-mental self-organizational process. Studies of early trauma and
neglect reveal that neural structure and function within the brain canbe severely affected and lead to long-lasting and extensive effects onthe brain’s capacity to adapt to stress.
210As we explore the nature of
relationships, emotion, and representational processes in the nextchapters, we will lay the groundwork for a more in-depth discussionof how the mind regulates its own functioning. It is clear that certainearly experiences create a fundamental impairment in self-organization.At one extreme are dismissing or avoidant attachments, which revealexcessively restrictive processes. At the other are preoccupied orambivalent attachments, which have intrusions of past elements ontothe present. In unresolved or disorganized attachments, there is a pri -
mary difficulty in organizing the self, which leads both to internal
flooding and to disruptions in interpersonal relationships.120 THE DEVELOPING MIND

THE DEVELOPING MINDEmotion
CHAPTER 4
/fl2rt
Emotion
APPROACHING EMOTION
Defining Emotion
Attachment relationships differ in the ways in which states of mind
and emotional communication are shared between parent and child.We have seen how a “state of mind” can be defined as the clusteringof a profile of activation within the brain’s neural network. Thesestates organize brain functioning and thus the experience of mind. Achild uses a parent’s state of mind to help organize her own mentalprocesses. The alignment of states of mind permits the child to regu -
late her own state by direct connection with that of her parent. For
example, in the process of “social referencing,” the child looks to thefacial expressions and other nonverbal aspects of the parent’s signalsto determine how she should feel and respond in an ambiguous situ -
ation.
1Social referencing reveals the fundamental way in which non -
verbal communication is the medium in which states are aligned.
What do these nonverbal signals actually represent?
The study of emotion suggests that nonverbal behavior is a pri -
mary mode in which emotion is communicated.2Facial expression,
eye gaze, tone of voice, bodily motion, and the timing of responseare each fundamental to emotional messages. But what exactly is“emotion”? We can know when others are upset and “emotional,”but what does this really mean? This chapter attempts to define emo -
tion and to explore its central role in human relationships and the
developing mind.
121

A much-emphasized universal finding has been that certain types
of affective expression seem to be both expressed and recognized inall cultures throughout the world; however, professionals often havequite different notions about what these affective expressions actu -
ally represent.
3There is a wide range of ideas about how to define
emotional processes. The definitions that follow incorporate bothresearch and clinical concepts in an effort to outline some fundamen -
tal aspects of emotion. The specific purposes of providing these defi -
nitions are (1) to attempt to clarify the basic functions of emotions,
and (2) to characterize which features of emotions are shared amongdifferent individuals and which may be quite distinct.
There is quite a bit of controversy among scientists from various
disciplines about what emotions actually are.
4For example, some
physiological and cognitive psychologists view emotions as existingwithin the individual, whereas more interpersonally oriented socialpsychologists and cultural anthropologists view emotions as beingcreated between people.
5Even within the field of neuroscience, there
is a heated debate about the nature of emotion in the brain.6For
example, it was generally accepted for many decades that emotionsemanate from the part of the brain called the limbic system. Variousauthors defined this system as the “primitive” or “old reptilian”brain, and described it as including such structures as the amygdala,orbitofrontal cortex, and anterior cingulate. Research paradigmsattempted to delineate the boundaries and specific functions of thisfrequently cited system, but often failed to identify its functional lim-its.
7The essential point here is that emotion is notlimited to some
specifically designed circuits of the brain that were once thought tobe the center of emotion. Instead, these same “limbic” regionsappear to have wide-ranging effects on most aspects of brain func -
tioning and mental processes.
8The limbic system is specialized to
carry out the appraisal of meaning or value of stimuli. It is also acenter for the mental module or information-processing systemwhich carries out social cognition, including face recognition, affilia -
tion, and “theory of mind” (the view that another person has a sub -
jective experience of mind). Some authors use these findings to argue
for the socially constructed nature of emotion.
9These findings also
support the idea that emotion is found throughout the entire brain.10
Within cognitive psychology, debate exists over the importance of
the “discrete” or “basic” emotions: what they are and how importantthey are in helping us understand emotional experience. Some authorsargue that there is little “basic” about these discrete emotions,
11while122 THE DEVELOPING MIND

others suggest that studying the manifestations of these universally
expressed states is crucial to understanding the role of emotions in bothcognitive processing and interpersonal relationships.
12Within the field
of developmental psychology and psychopathology, emotion and emo -
tion regulation are seen as woven from the same cloth.13In this manner,
emotions both are regulated and perform regulatory functions. Onemight surmise from these viewpoints that emotions are everywhere inthe processes of the mind. For instance, Kenneth Dodge states that “allinformation processing is emotional, in that emotion is the energy thatdrives, organizes, amplifies, and attenuates cognitive activity and inturn is the experience and expression of this activity.”
14This view
describes both the ubiquitous nature of emotion and the way in whichthe common distinction made between thought and feeling, cognitionand emotion, is artificial and potentially harmful to our understandingof mental processes.
Despite these controversial points, most theories of emotion
share some common themes. One is that emotion involves complexlayers of processes that are in constant interaction with the environ-ment. At a minimum, these interactions involve cognitive processes(such as appraisal or evaluation of meaning) and physical changes(such as endocrine, autonomic, and cardiovascular changes), whichmay reveal some repeated patterns over time. As Alan Sroufe hasdescribed, emotions involve “a subjective reaction to a salient event,characterized by physiological, experiential and overt behavioralchange.”
15A similar view suggests that emotion can be seen as
involving neurobiological, experiential, and expressive components.16
For our purposes, it will be helpful to approach a unifying defi -
nition of emotions with an open mind. Our everyday ideas about
emotions will undoubtedly influence how we approach these defini -
tions, but looking at what is known in science about how the brain
functions may help to open our minds to some new and helpful per -
spectives. Let us assume that the familiar end products of emotion—
what we usually consider in everyday thinking as the common feel -
ings of anger, fear, sadness, or joy—are actually notcentral to the ini -
tial experience of emotion. Let us also assume that emotions do not
necessarily exist at all as we may usually think of them: as some kindof packets of something that can be experienced, identified, andexpressed, as implied in the statement “Just get your feelings out.”Instead, let’s consider that emotions represent dynamic processes cre -
ated within the socially influenced, value-appraising processes of the
brain. Finally, as we examine what emotion might be in the individ -Emotion 123

ual, let us recall what we have learned about attachment relation -
ships and the alignment of states of mind. This requires that we con -
tinue the challenging task of thinking about the individual mind
within the context of human relationships, rather than in isolationfrom social meaning.
Initial Orientation, Appraisal, and Arousal
In the brain, a signal of heightened activity can be called an “initialorienting response.” This expression refers to how the brain andother systems of the body enter a state of heightened alertness withan internal message of “something important is happening here andnow.” This initial orienting response activates a cognitive alertingmechanism of “Pay attention now!” that does not require consciousawareness and does not initially have a positive or negative tone.
17
Very rapidly (within microseconds), the brain processes the represen-tations of the body and the external world generated with this initialorienting process. As this occurs, processes that can be called “elabo-rative appraisal and arousal” begin and direct the flow of energythrough the system. Elaborative appraisal and arousal serve to mod-ulate the state of mind by directing the flow of activation of certaincircuits and the deactivation of others. In this way, initial orientationsets off a cascade of subsequent elaborative appraisal–arousal cir-cuits, which serve to differentiate the unfolding states of mind withinthe individual.
18
Elaborative appraisals assess whether a stimulus is “good” or
“bad” and determine whether the organism should move toward oraway from the stimulus. The evolutionary benefit of having core pro -
cesses that rapidly assess the value of events in the world helps us to
understand why the appraisal and arousal processes are so central tothe functioning of the brain.
19As the circuits are activated in
response to this “good–bad” evaluation, the mind has a further elab -
oration of the flow of energy through its various mental processes
involved in approach or withdrawal.20Emotional processing prepares
the brain and the rest of the body for action. Elaborative appraisal
and arousal extend the initial orienting process of “Pay attention!”to “Act!” within a short period of time. The appraisal process evalu -
ates the informational meaning of stimuli; the arousal process directs
the flow of energy through the system.
Appraisal involves a complex web of evaluative mechanisms, in
which both external and internal factors play active roles. The spe -124 THE DEVELOPING MIND

cific nature of appraisal incorporates past experience of the stimulus,
including emotional and representational elements of memory; pres -
ent context of the internal emotional state and external social envi -
ronment; elements of the stimulus, such as intensity and familiarity;
and expectations for the future.
Alan Sroufe has described the central role of “discrepancy” of
the stimulus from internal expectations in the generation of emo -
tional engagement with the environmental surround.21In Sroufe’s
terms, the emotional arousal generated in response to such a discor -
dance between internal set and external features is called “tension.”
Emotion and its regulation are examined within a “tension modula -
tion hypothesis”: Such tension is not in need of reduction, but is
managed within an individual’s interaction with the environment,especially with significant others in the social world. Emotionalforms of arousal are distinguished from other forms of arousal—such as those arising from exercise or drinking caffeinated bever-ages—in that they reflect a subjective sense of meaning, which isevaluated in response to engaging with experience (internal or exter-nal). The framework offered here is consonant with this view ofemotional tension, and I use the general term “arousal” with thisemotional engagement frame in mind.
Primary Emotions
The term “primary” emotions can be used to describe the textures ofthe shifts in brain state that are the results of both initial orientationand elaborative appraisal–arousal processes. This concept is distinctfrom that of “basic” or “discrete” emotions, sometimes also called“categorical,” which refers to differentiated emotional states. The useof the term “primary” is suggested here to emphasize the initial,core, and ubiquitous quality of these essential emotional features. Asin “primary” colors, the term also implies that various combinationsof primary emotional elements may constitute a wide range of tex -
tures within the spectrum of emotional experience.
These primary emotional sensations of the mind’s state are with -
out words and can exist without consciousness. They reflect the non -
verbal sensation of shifts in the flow of activation and deactivation—
the flow of energy and evaluations of information—through the sys -
tem’s changing states. Primary emotions directly reflect the changes
in states of mind. These changes may be subtle or intense; they maybe fleeting or persistent; they may continue as gentle sensations, likeEmotion 125

waves lapping on a shore, or they may evolve into larger, global
changes, like a storm pounding on the beach. Primary emotions aredynamic processes of change; again, they are not packets of some -
thing, but rather are fluctuations in the energy and informational
flow of the mind. As such, the idea of primary emotions is congruentwith Ross Thompson’s notion of “emotion dynamics,” which involvethe timing/immediacy, magnitude, and specificity of emotionalresponse.
22
When an event has meaning for an individual, because it is
discrepant from prior experiences or because other evaluative pro -
cesses label it with significance, the brain is alerted to focus atten -
tion: “This is important! Pay attention!” At this point, the orienta -
tion serves as a kind of jolt to the system. The primary emotional
experience is one of increased energy and alertness. Second, thebrain must further appraise the meaning of the stimulus and of thearoused state itself. At this moment, primary emotions are nowbeing experienced as developing “hedonic tone” or “valence.” Forexample, the elaborative appraisal and arousal processes may cre-ate a sensation such as “This important thing is bad. Watch out!There is danger here,” and the flow of energy through the systembecomes channeled toward a cautious, hypervigilant stance. At thispoint, the rush of energy has now been directed to a fearful,unpleasant state reflected in a high primary emotional intensitywith a sense of danger. In contrast, elaborative appraisal andarousal may assess the initial orientation as good, something toseek more of; this creates a primary emotional state of eager antic -
ipation. In this way, appraisal and arousal create a state of mind
that is predisposing the individual to act in a certain fashion. Atthe most basic level, valence can be labeled as good and involveapproach, or can be labeled as bad and involve withdrawal.
23
Primary emotions themselves, in addition to the stimulus itself,
can be appraised by the value systems of the brain. This evaluationof primary emotions reflects the basic flow of emotions from initialorientation to elaborated appraisal–arousal processes. In this manner,the mind begins to assess the value of its own evaluative and activa -
tion processes. The recursive nature of such a continuing “appraisal
of appraisals” is actually quite common in the complex system of themind (we shall return to this characteristic in Chapter 6). This alsoraises the issue of how both temperament and learning directly affectcore emotional responsiveness.
24Some individuals may react to their
own intense arousal with a negative appraisal and a tendency to126 THE DEVELOPING MIND

withdraw both behaviorally and cognitively from the further elabo -
ration of their own emotional states, as in the case of shy individu -
als.25Others may have learned that certain intense emotional states
are not tolerated by others.26Such lack of attunement to intense
states may lead to the sense that they are “out-of-control” states, andthus “bad” and to be avoided. Such individuals learn to avoid emo -
tional intensity. In contrast, Jerome Kagan has demonstrated that
parents who support and encourage shy children to explore novel sit -
uations actually enhance the children’s capacity to tolerate new expe -
riences.
27In either of these examples, the appraisal of states of
arousal is influenced by interpersonal experience and leads to furtherelaboration of appraisal–arousal circuits, which directly influence theunfolding primary emotional states.
Differentiation and Categorical Emotions
Following the first two steps of initial orientation and elaborativeappraisal–arousal, a third phase that can occur in the experiencing ofemotions is the “differentiation” or channeling of activation path-ways. The more highly categorized activations represent the differen-tiation of primary emotional states. Sometimes we may feel “neu-tral,” being unable to identify any particular verbalizable feelings. Atother times, however, our primary emotional states—the flow andchange of energy through our emerging states of mind—become fur-ther differentiated into more well-defined states.
The differentiation of primary emotional states into specific classi -
fications of emotions, such as fear, brings us to the more familiar
notion of “categorical emotions.”
28“Categorical,” “basic,” or “dis -
crete” are terms commonly used for those classifications of sensations
that have been found universally throughout human cultures, such assadness, anger, fear, surprise, or joy.
29These internal emotional states
are often communicated through facial expressions, and each cultureseems to have words to describe their unique manifestations.
30They
also appear to have unique physiological profiles in which they mani -
fest themselves. Categorical emotions can be thought of as differenti -
ated states of mind that have evolved into specific, engrained patterns
of activation. The cross-cultural similarities in the manifestation of cat -
egorical emotions suggests that the human brain and body have char -
acteristic, inborn, physiologically mediated pathways for the elabora -
tion of these states of mind.
The brain has a physical reality to its construction throughEmotion 127

which internal states are expressed via our genetically and experi -
entially created bodies. Throughout the world, human beings share
common pathways to the expression of categorical emotions. Inevery culture, we can identify these characteristic expressions of“basic” emotions
31—for example, as sadness, anger, or fear. In sad -
ness, the face will show the typical findings of turned-down lips and
squinted eyes, together with slower bodily motions. Anger willinvolve dilated pupils, widened orbital area, raised eyebrows, fur -
rowed brow, and pursed lips. Fear reveals the combination of raised
eyebrows, flattened brow, and open mouth. Though we can catego -
rize emotions within an individual and across cultures,
32this does not
mean that one person’s categorical emotion, such as sadness or fear,is identical to that of another individual.
Affect and Mood
The way an internal emotional state is externally revealed is called“affective expression” or simply “affect.” Affect appears within non-verbal signals, including tone of voice, facial expression, and bodilymotion. These external expressions can be defined as “vitalityaffects” or as “categorical affects,”
33revealing the primary or the dif-
ferentiated nature of the emotional states, respectively. For manyresearchers, affect is essentially a social signal.
34The purpose of the
expression of emotion is considered to be social communication, assupported by the general finding that individuals reveal more affec-tive displays in social settings than they do when alone.
It is interesting how often people consider the categorical emo -
tions the only emotional processes they can try to know, or attempt
to communicate to others. Examining the three phases of emotionalresponse— states of initial orientation, elaborative appraisal and
arousal, and then categorical emotions—yields a new way of think -
ing about how to respond to the question “How are you feeling?”
The term “feeling” can be used to describe the conscious awarenessof either an emotion or an affect.
We can feel (categorically) “sad” or “mad” or “happy.” We may
come to be aware of this by how we sense our minds or our bodies, orby what we detect on our faces. We may, as children so often do, beaware of just feeling “bad” or “good,” or just “normal” (neutral),reflecting our initial appraisals without further differentiation into cat -
egorical emotions. Often we may also be aware of only feeling less dif -
ferentiated primary emotional states, such as surges of energy, a sense128 THE DEVELOPING MIND

of deflation, images of one sort or another, diffuse fogginess, or ner -
vous agitation. These flows in our states of mind—the changes in acti -
vations within our brains—are defined here as our primary emotions,
and can be seen externally as what have been termed vitality affects.Primary emotions are a frequent part of our basic “feelings.”
Parents attune to the subtle changes in a baby’s state of arousal,
not merely the categorical affect that the infant may or may not beexpressing.
35In fact, this expression of internal state through vitality
affects is the primary mode of communication between an infant and acaregiver during the early years of life. These affective expressionsreveal the profile or energy level of the state of mind at a particularmoment. The profile contains within it a picture of how the individual’sinternal state is being expressed in a changing state of activation of theface, motion in the body, and tone and intensity of the voice. Vitalityaffects reveal aspects of the primary nature of emotion—the changes inthe system’s state of arousal.
Individuals may attune to vitality affects across sensory modali-
ties. For example, a facial expression of joy can be mirrored in theresponse of another person’s tone of voice, with the rising and fallingof intensity of the sounds reflecting those of the muscles of the face.It may be that primary emotional experience reveals both how weknow ourselves and how we connect to one another. In parent–childrelationships in which the parent is depressed, vitality affects mayreveal a “depressed” state, with low energy and a global negativehedonic tone. Research also suggests that depression is associatedwith a decreased capacity to perceive the emotional expressions ofothers.
36The impaired ability to perceive facial expressions has been
correlated with alterations in the activity of the parts of the brainresponsible for such perceptual capacities.
37Studies of dyads with a
depressed parent reveal significant effects on the emotional develop -
ment of the child.38The experience of expressing one’s emotional
state and having others perceive and respond to those signals appearsto be of vital importance in the development of the brain. Such shar -
ing of primary emotions does not merely allow the child to feel
“good”; it allows the child to develop normally.
Primary emotions are expressed in a unique manner in the
moment, just as an individual’s state of mind at a particular timeis a one-of-a-kind state. The flow of states moves forward in timeand never repeats itself. This flow of states is unique. Vitalityaffects are the external expressions of primary emotions. In con -
trast, the external expressions of categorical emotions may reflectEmotion 129

the very specific routes through which the physical body is able to
reveal certain aspects of these differentiated internal states. Themechanisms facilitating this movement toward these different formsof categorical emotions, such as the differentiation of sadness,anger, or fear from one another, are not fully understood at thistime. The view proposed here is that the process from primary tocategorical emotions is influenced directly by the unique compo -
nents of neural processes that form a state of mind. In other
words, the mental state active at a given time may shape the elab -
oration of arousal and meaning from primary to categorical emo -
tions. More often, however, our changing states of activation with -
in the mind, our primary emotions, may ebb and flow without
necessarily becoming intense, entering consciousness, or becomingfurther differentiated into categorical emotional states.
The term “mood” refers to the general tone of emotions across
time. Mood can be thought of as a bias of the system toward certaincategorical emotions. Mood shapes the interpretation of perceptualprocessing and gives a “slant” to thinking, self-reflection, and recollec-tions. For example, a person who is in a “down” mood may find him-self interpreting things as evidence of his failures, think of the future indismal terms, reflect upon himself as a “loser,” and have increased rec-ollections of the numerous times he has made mistakes in his life. Theinfluence of mood upon all of these cognitive functions reveals howgeneral emotional tone reinforces itself in a feedback loop that keepsone’s mood spiraling in the same direction. This may explain the tena-cious nature of emotional disturbances such as depression or chronicanxiety, in which a given mood becomes a relatively fixed and disablingstate. In certain individuals, the ability to maintain a flexible flow ofprimary emotional states may be quite impaired and reflect difficulty intheir ability to modulate their emotions.
THE CONVERGENCE OF SOCIAL
PROCESSING AND EMOTION
By clarifying the distinction between primary emotions and the more
familiar idea of categorical emotions, we can become more sensitiveto the early stages of meaning-making interactions with others. Aswe’ll see in the pages to follow, emotion in general is a complexseries of processes and is of central importance in the mind. Itinvolves the dual nature of the essence of mind: the flow of energy130 THE DEVELOPING MIND

and the processing of information. Emotion also reflects the essential
way in which the mind emerges from the interface between neuro -
physiological processes and interpersonal relationships: It serves as a
set of integrating processes linking various systems in a dynamic flowacross domains and through time. Within the brain itself, emotionlinks various systems together to form a state of mind. Emotion alsoserves as a set of processes connecting one mind to another withininterpersonal relationships.
The appraisal centers of the brain are located within the limbic
system. A brief review of the anatomy involved will help us to visual -
ize how these processes converge.
39These centers involve such areas
as the amygdala, anterior cingulate, and orbitofrontal cortex. Exter -
nal stimuli enter the brain via the sensory systems, such as vision,
hearing, and touch. The representations generated from these percep -
tual processes are then filtered through the thalamus and passed on
to the amygdala, where they are appraised and given initial value:“Pay attention? Is this good or bad?” The amygdala is able todirectly affect these basic evaluative and perceptual processes. It alsosends these representations on for further evaluation by the anteriorcingulate and orbitofrontal cortex.
40Like the amygdala, these centers
are processing information about the social environment: the facialexpression, direction of eye gaze, and other aspects of others’ non-verbal behavior that reveal their state of mind.
41Information about
the social context directly affects the appraisal process. These areas
of the limbic system also register the state of the body and directlyaffect its states of activation.
42Information from these areas is passed
on to the hippocampus for “cognitive mapping” and, in some cases,transfer into explicit memory. The orbitofrontal cortex also plays amajor role in coordinating these appraisal and arousal processes withthe more complex representations of “higher thinking” and socialcognition.
43
This brief review of the limbic system’s neurophysiological coor -
dination of input and brain/body response highlights the general
statements made throughout this book about the mind: Neural pro -
cesses and social relationships both contribute to the creation of
mental life. The limbic system functions as the center of processingof social information, autobiographical consciousness, the evaluationof meaning, the activation of arousal, and the coordination of bodilyresponse and higher cognitive processing. These processes are notlimited to the limbic region, however; rather, they emerge as a con -
vergence of information processing and energy flow that directlyEmotion 131

influences a wide array of both basic and more complex processes of
the brain.
NONCONSCIOUS AND
CONSCIOUS EMOTION
Emotions are primarily nonconscious mental processes. In their
essence, they create a state of readiness for action, for “motion,” dis -
posing us to behave in particular ways within the environment. Emo -
tional reactions create this disposition by determining the brain’s
activation of a wide array of circuits leading to changes in the stateof arousal within the mind/brain and other areas of the body. Theamygdala is a cluster of neurons that serves as a receiving and send -
ing station between input from the outer world and emotional
response. As a coordinating center within the brain, the amygdala,along with related areas such as the orbitofrontal cortex and anteriorcingulate, plays a crucial role in coordinating perceptions with mem-ory and behavior. These regions are especially sensitive to socialinteractions. They nonconsciously assign significance to stimuli; theiractions influence a wide array of mental processes without theinvolvement of conscious awareness. These circuits are widely con-nected to other regions that directly influence the functioning of theentire brain as a whole system.
In fact, the limbic system also registers the state of the body and
directly influences the body’s state of activation via regulation of theautonomic nervous system.
44In this manner, the limbic system serves
as a source of social processing, stimulus appraisal, and brain/body(“emotional”) arousal; these may originate within particular limbicregions, but there are no clear boundaries to their effects.
45Once
again, emotion is not merely a function restricted to the areasdefined as central to the limbic system; emotion directly influencesthe functions of the entire brain and body, from physiological regula -
tion to abstract reasoning.
46
The amygdala has been studied more than any other appraisal
center and has been found to play a crucial part in the fight-or-flightresponse. Classic studies have examined its role especially withregard to fear states.
47Let’s look at the amygdala as an example of
the elaborative feedback mechanism of the appraisal process thatoccurs without the requirement of consciousness. Studies of theamygdala have examined how the initiation of an appraisal leads to132 THE DEVELOPING MIND

subsequent perceptual biases that reinforce the nature of the initial
appraisal. The flow of activation of the brain’s circuits begins a pro -
cess of further assembly of various activations, which then ready the
individual organism for a particular response. The amygdala receivesand sends signals directly from and to the visual system, reacting tovisual stimuli without the involvement of consciousness. The amyg -
dala responds to the initial visual representation—say, of a dog—by
sending signals back to the same and even earlier layers of the visualprocessing system, and then by producing initial orientation of theattentional and perceptual apparatus of the brain: “Watch carefully;this is important!” If the amygdala also registers the visual input asdangerous, it can establish elaborative appraisal–arousal processesthat create a state of fear in the brain and then feed back to thevisual system. First receiving from and then sending signals to thevisual centers, the amygdala can rapidly bias the perceptual appara -
tus toward interpreting the stimuli as dangerous. All of this occurswithin seconds and does not depend on conscious awareness.
Nonconsciously, the brain is wired, at least with regard to the
fear response, to create a “self-fulfilling prophecy.” If the amygdalais excessively sensitive and fires off a “Danger!” signal, it will auto-matically alter ongoing perceptions to appear to the individual asthreatening. This may be a basis for phobias and other anxiety disor-ders. For example, if a child encounters a dog that growls and lungesat her, she may have a response of fear. At this time, the amygdaladirectly activates arousal centers (located in the brainstem andforebrain) that create a general state of increased excitability throughthe release of substances such as noradrenaline in the brain andadrenaline in the body. The whole child becomes hyperalert andready to deal with the “danger.” If particular mental representationsare active at the time of this arousal, then they will become associ -
ated in memory with a feeling of danger. This association occurs via
Hebb’s axiom (neurons that fire together wire together; see Chapter2). Now a learned feedback loop has been established in which a dogcan be a source of amygdala activation firing in the future. The brainlearns to anticipate a bodily response of hypervigilance to the ani -
mal, and a constellation of fear and avoidance behaviors to dogs can
then unfold. Such early experiences of fear may become indeliblesubcortical emotional memories, which may have lasting effects.
48
How does this rapid, automatic process become conscious? Con -
sciousness is a controversial subject that has long intrigued philoso -
phers and more recently neuroscientists.49Though there is no univer -
sally accepted explanation for the experience of consciousness, eitherEmotion 133

in the sense of awareness or in the qualitative sensation of subjective
experiencing, there are some substantiated views that are quite help -
ful in understanding aspects of the mind. One such view of the inter -
nal experience of conscious awareness is the view of consciousness as
involving a system in the brain responsible for working memory, the“chalkboard of the mind.” In this perspective, perceptual representa -
tions from external stimuli or internally generated images from imag -
ination or memory are functionally connected within an area of the
brain called the lateral prefrontal cortex. It is in this region thatattention is modulated, so that an “attentional spotlight” can befocused on particular representational profiles in the brain.
50Work -
ing memory is able to handle only a limited amount of units of infor -
mation, usually in a serial fashion. Neural activation profiles can be
linked to the activity of the lateral prefrontal cortex and give theinternal sensation of being within an attentional focus of conscious -
ness. The lateral prefrontal cortex is located to the outer side of thefront part of the brain, just to the side of the orbitofrontal cortex; it
is thought to act by linking items together within conscious aware-ness, where they can be focally attended to and manipulated.
51
What exactly it means for neural activation profiles to become
“linked” is a central concern for scientists of the brain and mind.How do simultaneously activated processes bind together to form acontinuity of experience? One approach to trying to answer thisbinding question comes from studies of the waves of electrical activ-ity sweeping across the brain on a regular basis. A forty-cycle-per-second (“forty-hertz” or “40-Hz”) pattern has been noted, in whichthe brain becomes active from back to front.
52This activity occurs in
both halves of the brain and has been identified as a “thalamo -
cortical” sweep, going from the deeper areas such as the thalamus up
toward the higher cortical regions. One view is that representationalprocesses (the neural net profiles activated at a particular moment intime) that are “on” at the time of the sweep are bound together asone seemingly continuous flow of conscious experience. This viewallows us to see how the phenomenon of consciousness creates asense of continuity out of what is really a set of quite discontinuousrepresentational processes, such as sights, sounds, thoughts, bodilystates, and self-reflections.
53This “40-Hz” view also gives us insight
into how the lateral prefrontal cortex may become “linked” to a par -
ticular set of representations—those that are active during the sweep.
The attentional focus of working memory can select from those rep -
resentations the limited number it may be able to handle at any one134 THE DEVELOPING MIND

time. Because of the nature of the sweeping, each hemisphere can
function quite independently of the other. There are probably left-hemisphere and right-hemisphere forms of consciousness that arequite distinct from each other, based on the unique nature of the rep -
resentational processes of each hemisphere. This will be explored
briefly below and in depth in the next chapter.
A related view
54is that when distributed neural assemblies
become active in a rapid and strong manner such that they canachieve a certain degree of functional clustering, a temporarily stablestate of complexity is achieved. When these assemblies achieve a cer -
tain level of integration, they can become “linked” to the thalamo -
cortical system and their mental processes become a part of con -
sciousness. This view is also compatible with the notion of some core
thalamocortical 40-Hz sweeping process and the linkage with theactivity of the lateral prefrontal regions. As we shall discuss in moredetail in later chapters, these models of consciousness will be usefulin helping to understand a number of aspects of mental life.
One view of how emotions become conscious is when their
effects are connected to the activity of the attentional mechanisms ofthe lateral prefrontal cortex.
55For example, when we say that we
have a “gut feeling” about something, we may be referring, literally,to a somatic representation in our brains of our “gut response”—thebody’s response—to a stimulus.
56This feedback loop of bodily
response leading to emotional reaction has been a perspective longheld by researchers with much scientific validation.
57What is crucial
to note, however, is that our brains frequently receive this bodilyinformation without the involvement of conscious awareness. Thebinding of consciousness may be an “epiphenomenon” in many situ -
ations—something that is not essential for other neural reactions
subsequently to occur. We may frequently have nonconscious “gutreactions” that profoundly influence our decision-making processeswithout our awareness of their impact.
We can also become aware of a sense that something feels
“meaningful.” In this case, we have caught a conscious glimpse ofemotion as a value system for the appraisal of the significance ofstimuli. Some aspect of the effects of emotional processing hasbecome bound in consciousness. Another example of emotion’sbecoming a part of our conscious experience is when we feel our -
selves becoming lost in a “sea of emotion.” Our minds are capable
of being bombarded by a flood of stimuli from emotional processes,which fill us with an overwhelming feeling. These sensations mayEmotion 135

reflect primary emotions (such as internal shifts in states of arousal)
or categorical emotions (such as anger, fear, sadness, excitement, orjoy). Emotions are what create meaning in our lives, however,whether we are aware of them or not.
Some people have very little awareness of their emotional reac -
tions to things. For one man, for example, it was easy to be con -
scious of his thoughts about interactions with others, but he had a
difficult time letting his wife know verbally “how he felt” beyondsimple statements of “good,” or “bad,” or “I don’t know.” We couldsay that for some reason, the representations of his emotional state—things like his bodily response or shifts in his mental state—did notget linked to his lateral prefrontal attentional processes. We cannotsay whether they in fact were present or not in his mind. In a sense,this person was emotionally blind. Unfortunately, this blindness toemotions included his unawareness of his wife’s states as well as hisown.
This illustrates the importance of recognizing that emotional
processes are primarily nonconscious. Some people, and certainlythis man’s wife, would be prone to say that he “has no feelings.” Aswe’ve seen in Chapter 3, avoidant attachment fosters an emotionaldisconnection of the child from the parent. There is some suggestionthat this disconnection may also be prominent in this man’s lack ofconscious access to his own nonverbal experience of primary emo-tions. The lack of connection between consciousness and thearousal–appraisal system does not mean that there is a lack of emo-tion, however. Instead, we can state that there is a lack of binding ofemotion to consciousness. Consciousness may be necessary for anintentional alteration in behavior patterns beyond “reflexive” re -
sponses. Without the involvement of consciousness and the capacity
to perceive others’ and one’s own emotions, there may be an inabilityto plan actively for the future, to alter engrained patterns of behav -
ior, or to engage in emotionally meaningful connections with others.
EMOTION AS A VALUE SYSTEM
FOR THE APPRAISAL OF MEANING
The functioning of the brain as a complex system of neuronal cir -
cuits requires it to have some way of determining which firings are
useful, neutral, or harmful. Without such an appraisal mechanism,stimuli from the outside world and internally generated states and136 THE DEVELOPING MIND

representations would all be equally welcome. Such an organism
would not be able to organize its behavior, to accomplish tasks thatallowed it to survive, or to pass on its traits.
58The brain must have a
way of establishing value in order to organize its functions. Valuedisposes us to behave in particular ways. At the most basic level, thefirst phase of this process, initial orientation, lets the organism“know” whether to pay attention to something that is important.The second phase, consisting of elaborative appraisal and arousal,gives the individual the value of whether the stimulus is good or bad.Good things should be sought; bad things should be avoided. Value
systems in the brain function by way of increasing states of arousal.Evaluative circuits serve as a neuromodulatory system with extensiveinnervation throughout the brain that can lead to hyperexcitabilityand increased neuronal plasticity. Chemically, this makes the neuronshypersensitive and more readily activated. By initiating attentionalmechanisms, arousal enhances the focus of attention on a particularstimulus. In this way, attention is often considered the process thatdirects the flow of information processing. For perceptual processing,this means, for example, that a person will pay more attention to anobject. For memory, arousal leads to enhanced encoding viaincreased neuronal plasticity and the creation of new synaptic con-nections and therefore increased likelihood of future retrieval.
59
As the activations within the brain change, energy flows through
the system. Changes in the state of the system are changes in thisflow of energy. Many factors in addition to appraisal influence whatdetermines how the system’s state changes over time. These deter -
mining factors include present input from the external world or from
other components of the body, as well as constraints establishedfrom prior experience (such as Hebbian connections) and presentappraisals. Moreover, there are many forms of arousal, whichinvolve different circuitry. Initial orientation may then activate spe -
cific elements of attention. This initial stage “energizes” attentional
and perceptual circuits, which then lead to further, elaboratedappraisals. This elaboration can produce different forms of subse -
quent arousal, depending on the nature of the appraisal. At the most
basic level, stimuli appraised as “good” will arouse elements of cog -
nitive and behavioral approach. Stimuli appraised as “bad” will
arouse withdrawal patterns of neural circuitry activation. When wethink of the concept of “arousal,” we need to keep in mind that it is ageneral notion referring to a wide range of specific activation patterns.
It is interesting to note that some of these approach/avoidanceEmotion 137

distinctions may in fact be hard-wired into the brain. For example,
recent studies suggest that the ability to process others’ facial expres -
sion of emotions, an ability thought to exist in the anterior cingulate,
the orbitofrontal cortex, and the amygdala, may have distinct char -
acteristics in different regions. Preliminary findings suggest that the
amygdala appears to contain face-recognition cells that exist solely torespond to expressions of fear and anger—not positive emotions oreven other negative ones, such as disgust.
60The limbic regions use
input of others’ emotions to regulate a person’s internal state andexternal responses directly. As Main and Hesse have proposed, disor -
ganized attachment is commonly associated with parents who show
frightening or frightened behaviors.
61Perhaps these findings reflect
the role of parental anger and fear in repeatedly activating specificface-recognition cells within the amygdala as well as generating thecharacteristic fight–flight response mediated by this limbic region.Could such a specific and ingrained set of limbic states be at the coreof the disorganized behaviors (and dissociation) exhibited by thesechildren? As we’ve discussed in Chapter 3, as they grow older, suchchildren tend to develop controlling, hostile, and aggressive behaviorwith their peers.
62These behaviors can be proposed as elements of an
excessively sensitized amygdala’s fight response. Low levels of stressmay be able to activate these reflexive responses and may trigger therapid perceptual–amygdala feedback loop, which reinforces the sen-sation of threat. In general, the communication of different types ofemotions in children’s home environments and the unique neurobio-logical effects of these emotions may be important in determining thechildren’s patterns of response over time.
Some aspects of a value system are inborn, and some are
acquired through experience. Some constitutional aspects of a valuesystem include the motivational systems of attachment and noveltyseeking. Within the brain are clusters of cells that are designed to firein response to eye contact and facial expressions.
63These clusters of
social responders are located within the value centers of the brain,such as the amygdala and the orbitofrontal cortex. For example,seeking proximity to a caregiver and attaining face-to-face communi -
cation with eye gaze contact is hard-wired into the brain from birth.
It is not learned. Similarly, infants are “natural explorers,” seekingout new stimuli within their increasingly sophisticated ability tosearch the environment. Discussions of the genetic determinants ofemotional behavior offer helpful insights into the way in which ourvalue systems organize our behavior to increase the chance of sur -
vival. Evolutionary theory suggests that those organisms with geneti -138 THE DEVELOPING MIND

cally encoded specificity to their appraisal, such as fearing a snake or
becoming aroused by a suitable mate, will have a significantlyincreased likelihood of passing on their genetic information to futuregenerations.
64Genes clearly play a large role in the value system of
the brain.
Action, learning, and development can be viewed as interrelated
sets of phenomena throughout life.65For infants, interactions with the
environment are driven by the emergence of the increasingly complexcapacities of their brains to represent the world around them. Theinborn aspects of the value system are in place from the beginning oflife, but the system is also shaped by learning from experience. Forexample, a child will naturally make eye contact with a parent as a“good” interaction. However, if such eye contact results in her beingoverwhelmed and intruded upon by the actions of the parent, then suchinteractions may become associated with a negative value. The childlearns that eye contact should be avoided. The brain can learn to mod-ify its response to the evaluative system’s initial criteria of what is goodor bad, based on past interactions with others. If past eye contact leadsto a flood of disorganizing activations, the avoidance of such experi-ences in the future will help keep the self organized.
The appraisal of stimuli and the creation of meaning are central
functions of the mind that occur with the arousal process of emo-tion. Incoming stimuli are appraised for their value, and the repre-
sentations of these stimuli are then linked with a sense of “goodness”or “badness.” As the child develops, the increasingly complex repre-sentational system becomes capable of more subtle evaluative sensa -
tions. These variations on the “good or bad” theme are what lead to
the wide variety of emotions we are capable of feeling. We areunique individuals precisely because both our value systems and ourinteractional histories are one-of-a-kind combinations. As the inter -
twined nature of value system responses and environmental encoun -
ters unfolds, each of us continually emerges and defines ourselves.
RESPONSE FLEXIBILITY,
RELATIONSHIPS, AND EMOTION
Central to this process of creating meaning and emotion is the
orbitofrontal cortex.66As noted in Chapter 1, this area of the brain
sits at the interface between “lower” regions involved in taking inputfrom the body and the senses, and the “higher” parts involved inEmotion 139

integrating information and creating complex thoughts and plans.
This integrating region is involved in stimulus appraisal (the mean -
ing, value, or emotional valence given to a stimulus),67affect regula -
tion (the capacity of the brain to modulate its psychophysiological
state),68social cognition (the complex process by which one individ -
ual is able to have “mindsight” or the ability to perceive the mental
state of another),69and autonoetic consciousness (the ability to per -
form mental time travel).70It is this region that is postulated to be
one of the core areas of deficit in the major disorder of social cogni -
tion, autism.71Other cognitive processes involving the appraisal–
arousal structures, such as the orbitofrontal cortex, the anteriorcingulate, and the amygdala, include emotional memory (especiallyfear),
72empathy (feeling what another feels),73and categorical emo -
tions.74
The orbitofrontal cortex has also been demonstrated as central
in mediating a process we can call “response flexibility.” As Nobreand colleagues have demonstrated in visual stimulus experiments,this region appears to mediate the “switching or reversing of stimu-lus-response associations” and is at the “interface between automaticdefault-mode operations of the CNS [central nervous system] andneural processes that allow for flexible adaptations to shifting con-texts and perspectives.”
75In other words, the orbitofrontal region is
active in taking changing or unexpected internal and external condi-tions and creating new and flexible behavioral and cognitiveresponses instead of automatic reflexive ones.
76
We can propose that this response-flexibility process may
become integrated with the other functions subsumed by theorbitofrontal cortex, as described above, as well as other relatedregions, such as the lateral prefrontal cortex and its mediation ofworking memory. As Mesulam has stated, “The prefrontal cortexplays a critical role in these attentional and emotional modulationsand allows neural responses to reflect the significance rather than thesurface properties of sensory events.”
77The prefrontal mediation of
response flexibility may thus entail a coordinated process incorporat -
ing sensory, perceptual, and appraisal mechanisms and enabling new
and personally meaningful responses to be enacted. We can proposethat such an integrating function may allow an individual, for exam -
ple, to approach life decisions, relationships, and perhaps narrative
responses with self-reflection and with a sense of perspective on past,present, and future considerations. In this manner, the capacity forresponse flexibility may become functionally linked with otherprefrontally mediated domains that we have discussed, such as140 THE DEVELOPING MIND

autonoetic consciousness, social cognition, emotionally attuned com -
munication, and working memory. The outcome of such well-devel -
oped and integrated functioning can be proposed to play a central
role in the individual’s ongoing development, subjective experiences,and interpersonal relationships.
Response flexibility enables the mind to assess incoming stimuli
or emotional states and then to modify external behaviors as well asinternal reactions. Such an ability can be proposed as an importantcomponent of collaborative, contingent communication. The capac -
ity for response flexibility may also be revealed in the coherence of
the discourse process of the AAI. As suggested by Main,
78coherent
narratives require the flexible focusing of attention on attachment-related issues. The inability to exhibit response flexibility can thus beproposed to contribute to incoherent narratives of the insecure adultattachment findings. Such an impairment may also be revealed in thecollapse in the maintenance of a narrative strategy seen in the “can-not classify” adult category described by Hesse.
79Thus, response
flexibility can be proposed to be a contributing link between parent–child attachment and adult narratives. In situations where this func-tion fails to develop or its integration with other processes isimpaired, especially with those mediated by the prefrontal regions,we can predict that tenacious, global effects may be exerted withinthe individual’s internal and interpersonal experiences across time. Aswith other mental processes, response flexibility is likely to be state-dependent: Internal and interpersonal contexts can promote orinhibit the integrative mechanisms on which they are created. In thismanner, response flexibility can be seen as an integrative capacitythat is achieved under certain conditions, rather than a fixed devel -
opmental accomplishment. For these reasons, an individual may
exhibit this adaptive flexibility in certain situations and not in others.As we’ll discuss in the final three chapters, the ways in which emo -
tional states flexibly integrate and organize widely distributed inter -
nal and interpersonal processes—the manner in which the flow of
energy and information is adaptively modulated—can be seen ashaving a direct effect on self-regulation, relationships, and develop -
ment across the lifespan. Future studies will be helpful in clarifying
the nature of response flexibility, its mediation by the orbitofrontalregion, its potentially experience-dependent development, and itspossible relationship to incoherent narratives and patterns of parent–child communication.
How are response flexibility and other integrative processes
influenced by the emotional communication inherent in many inter -Emotion 141

personal relationships? Looking toward neurobiological structure
and function may shed some light on this question. The orbitofrontalcortex sits at a crucial neuroanatomic position at the uppermost partof the limbic system—the center of our basic appraisals, thought tobe the origin of our widely distributed emotional experiences. As dis -
cussed earlier in this chapter, a controversy exists as to what the limi -
tations of the limbic region actually are: Its boundaries as a major
center for influencing the functioning of the brain cannot be clearlydelineated, and in this way the entire brain can be considered “emo -
tional.”
80As we can see, the social/emotional/meaning-making pro -
cesses of the limbic system help coordinate a wide range of mental
functions. The result of the adaptive integration of these functionsmay be the proposed process of response flexibility.
The orbitofrontal cortex receives direct input from the sensory
cortex, which is responsible for perception; the somatosensory cortexand brainstem, which register somatic sensation; the autonomic ner-vous system, which controls bodily functions; the dorsolateralprefrontal cortex, involved in attentional processes; the medial tem-poral lobe, involved in explicit memory; and the associational cortex,involved in abstract forms of thought. Allan Schore has describedhow the development of the orbitofrontal cortex is thought to de-pend on stimulation from the emotional connections of the attach-ment figure in the form of eye contact, face-to-face communication,and affective attunement.
81The orbitofrontal cortex, like the
amygdala, has specific cells particularly responsive to facial expres-sion and eye gaze direction.
82These fundamental aspects of social
signals specifically activate these regions of the brain. The orbito -
frontal cortex is also crucial in coordinating bodily states and the
widely distributed and linked representations that are fundamental toreasoning processes, motivation, and the creation of emotionalmeaning.
83
Emotion is a fundamental part of attachment relationships in the
early years and throughout the lifespan. The earliest forms of com -
munication are about primary emotional states. This sharing of basic
appraisal and arousal processes establishes the fundamental way inwhich one person becomes connected to another within emotionalrelationships. We can also propose that the reciprocal collaborationwithin such contingent communication facilitates the development ofa parallel, prefrontally mediated process, response flexibility, thatenables the individual to respond to changing internal and interper -
sonal contexts in an adaptive, “internally collaborative” manner.142 THE DEVELOPING MIND

Such internal collaboration may be seen as a way in which widely
distributed neural processes come to be recruited into a flexible stateof mind, one that is adaptive to a range of internal as well as exter -
nal factors. In this way, we can see how intimate, reciprocal human
communication may directly activate the neural circuitry responsiblefor giving meaning, integrating the capacity for flexible responses,and shaping the subjective experience of living an emotionallyvibrant life.
EMOTION AND SOMATIC RESPONSE
The signals from the body also directly shape our emotions. Ourawareness of bodily state changes—such as tension in our muscles,shifts in our facial expressions, or signals from our heart or intes -
tines—lets us know how we feel, though bodily feedback occurs even
without awareness. Perceptions of the environment certainly occur inthe brain, but the subsequent reactions of the body may follow verysoon after and become the “data” informing us about what thoseperceptions mean to us. In this way, our appraisal mechanisms maydepend upon bodily reactions to determine the direction of subse-quent elaboration. States of mind are created within the psycho-biological states of the brain and other parts of the body.
84
For example, contracting the muscles of the face in a characteris-
tically negative (frown) or positive (smile) manner produces a respec-tive bias in interpreting data.
85If we sense our own faces smiling, we
are more likely to enter a positive state of mind and to view ourexperience from that stance. Studies even demonstrate that contract -
ing the muscles of the left side of the face (presumably requiring acti -
vation of the right hemisphere) is associated with negative bias,
whereas contracting those of the right side of the face (presumablyrequiring left-brain activation) leads to positive appraisals.
86Somato -
sensory data from the face are registered in the brain and directly
influence the state of activation, so that information processing isshaped by the effects of this information.
The neurologist Antonio Damasio has postulated that the
change in bodily state is perceived and represented in the brain aswhat he calls a “somatic marker.”
87Two forms of bodily response
are especially relevant. Muscle changes in our limbs and faces arehighly sensitive components of emotional reactions, and these sendinput directly to the brain and are represented in an area called theEmotion 143

somatosensory cortex. Of note is that the portion of the somato -
sensory cortex in the right hemisphere has more integrated represen -
tations than that in the lefthemisphere, suggesting a more direct role
of the right brain in the processing of somatic markers. As we’ll see,the brain’s asymmetry plays an important role in understanding emo -
tion and the mind. The other form of bodily response is in changes
in the viscera, such as the stomach, intestines, heart, and lungs. Vis -
ceral changes are registered in the orbitofrontal cortex and related
areas, also especially in the right hemisphere. Interestingly, theseregions of the brain monitor as well as regulate these visceral reac -
tions.
88
Experience establishes learned associations between external
stimuli and these bodily responses. In this view, our knowledge ofhow we feel is based in large part upon the nature of these somaticmarkers. As we develop, Damasio postulates further, we acquire thecapacity to have an “as-if” loop, in which an internal stimulus (suchas a thought, image, or memory) can activate an “as-if” somaticmarker.
89Our brains create a representation of bodily changes that is
independent of the present-day response. A thought can be associ-ated with an emotional response containing a somatic marker thathas been generated internally. This is a representation of a shift inbodily state created by our brains from imagination and past experi-ences. Memories of emotional experiences evoke as-if somatic mark-ers, which can feel as real as direct bodily responses and can deeplyenliven the associated imagery of the recollection. In some cases wewill also have the actual bodily changes, such as increased heart rate,sweating, and dilated pupils when we are recalling a past frighteningevent.
For example, if an adult was bitten by a cat as a child, the state
of fear and arousal at the time will be registered in the brain as a so -
matic marker of fear associated with the image and idea of a cat. In
the future, seeing a cat may activate a similar bodily state of fear,instantiating a somatic marker similar to the time of the initial catbite and activating a set of associational memory processes linked tothe time of the original bite. An “as-if” somatic marker reveals howthe process of imagination or memory can elicit a sensory response,which then initiates a cascade of fear-related associations that may bequite debilitating. This may be one way in which unresolved post -
traumatic conditions continue to perpetuate frightening reactions
from long ago; such individuals feel as if they are being traumatizedover and over again.144 THE DEVELOPING MIND

INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES
IN EMOTIONAL EXPERIENCE
Some couples experience a kind of “compatibility” that both mem -
bers of a pair may have felt when they first met: They resembled
each other in certain favored ways of being, in certain needs for playand relaxation, or in preferred times for work. In some pairs wherethere is a discordant match in the partners’ attachment histories, thedisparity between their individual appraisal systems may lead to dif -
ficulty in their pattern of communicating despite this compatibility.
For example, a husband with a dismissing state of mind with respectto attachment had experiences with his mother that appeared not tohave reinforced the positive effects of emotional intimacy. His rela -
tionship with her seemed not to have offered him encounters in
which eye gaze and face-to-face contact were associated with a senseof soothing. Recall that studies of avoidantly attached pairs revealthat the body continues to register distress during separation (forchildren) and in discussion of attachment issues (in adults). Thisfinding suggests that the original value system, which assigned a“good” meaning to affective connections between people, has proba-bly remained intact even after repeatedly disappointing and rejectingexperiences. What has been learned is the person’s development ofbehavioral and complex cognitive responses, such as memory andnarrative, that serve to minimize conscious access to this persistentdistress. The brain has learned to adapt itself to the learned experi-ence by minimizing the manifestations of such distress on otheraspects of mental functions.
In this couple, the wife’s experience of her husband was that in a
quiet way he seemed to enjoy her presence. To her, his lack of focuson her emotional states provided a sense of first safety and then frus -
tration. She seemed to have had an ambivalent attachment with her
own mother and a disorganized one with her father; she now had anunresolved adult attachment status, with a best-fitting alternativeclassification of preoccupied. On some nonverbal level, she felt thather husband liked being “close” to her, though he would never statethis directly. She was probably sensing something real—an intact butfrightened emotional system in her husband, which did indeed con -
tinue to value attachment. Both on the surface of his behavior and in
his conscious experience, however, he denied the importance of suchconnections. In fact, the husband seemed to pride himself on hisautonomy, often stating that the sign of healthy development is toEmotion 145

“not need anyone, just want them.” His wife did not feel needed.
She often didn’t even feel wanted.
With many couples, the very characteristics that each partner
initially found attractive in the other become the same qualities thatcreate intolerable frustration and drive them to a therapist for help.In this couple, the wife was attracted at first to the husband’s“autonomy and independence.” She felt safe and unthreatened by hisemotional distance. The husband liked his wife’s “sensitivity andability to express her emotions.” She offered him something he hadnever had. As time went on, however, she began to feel so isolatedthat his autonomy made her infuriated. He began to sense her emo -
tional response as attacks on his personality. This couple became
stuck in an emotional rut.
In this case example, the wife’s capacity to experience emotion was
quite different from that of her husband. She was able to noticechanges in her body’s sensations, such as a tightening in her muscles, aqueasy feeling in her stomach, and a trembling in her hands. She mightfeel her face beginning to smile, or notice tears on her cheeks. Each ofthese bodily messages let her know some aspect of her emotional state:anger, fear, sadness, joy. The ability to sense this somatic feedback is thekind of self-awareness that has led numerous researchers to postulatethatthe body’s response lets us know how we feel.
Somatic markers—actual or “as-if”—can be generated without
consciousness. These representations can influence perceptual bias,memory processes, and rational decision making without our aware-ness. In this couple, the wife often could sense when she was having anintense “emotional experience” by the way her body felt. For her hus -
band, life was not so full of these sensations. He would make decisions,
perceive the world, and recall things (or not) without a sense that anykind of biasing was occurring. But we cannot say that he was any lessinfluenced by his hidden value system than his wife, whose emotionswere more readily accessible to her conscious experience.
Working memory is able to contain a number of processes and
manipulate them within conscious awareness. These processes in -
clude present perceptual representations, items from long-term mem -
ory, and states of the body. To minimize distress and maximize func -
tion, the brain of this dismissingly attached husband might have had
the challenge of focusing his conscious attention away from attach -
ment-related experiences. This diverting of attention might have con -
cerned external events, such as the behavioral response of acting as if
his mother didn’t return (as seen in the infant separation studies), aswell as internal events, such as the minimization of the importance of146 THE DEVELOPING MIND

parental relationships (as revealed in the AAI; see Chapter 3). A dis -
tressed response is most readily seen in the body’s state of increased
sweating, heart rate, respiration, and muscle tension. Each of thesemay become activated in attachment situations with avoidantlyattached children and dismissing adults. To avoid impairment offunctioning, the representation of these responses must be kept awayfrom working memory. To accomplish such a task means creating apattern of neural interactions in which somatic markers are not linkedto the working memory processes of the lateral prefrontal cortex.
Given the location of these processes, we can hypothesize how
this husband might have been affected by such an adaptation. Thecortical representations of somatic muscle responses are most highlyintegrated in the right hemisphere of the brain. Visceral responses aremonitored by the orbitofrontal cortex and the closely associatedanterior cingulate, also primarily on the right side. The lateralprefrontal cortex is centered just to the side of the orbitofrontal cor-tex, with which it receives and sends direct connections. Reductionin input to the right lateral prefrontal cortex would be quite helpfulto avoid receiving the representations of the right-sided somato-sensory and orbitofrontal cortices.
What would this mean for this man and others with a similar
attachment history of distant emotional communication from a pri-mary caregiver? Impaired input of the right-sided sources of somaticmarkers would functionally lead such individuals to be consciouslyunaware of their bodies’ responses. They would therefore not be ableto know easily how they feel. Furthermore, if the right lateral pre -
frontal cortex had more general blockages, we would predict that the
other functions of the right hemisphere might also be less accessible toconscious awareness. In this case, the husband had a difficult time see -
ing the gist or context of things. He also seemed unable to read his
wife’s state of mind as expressed through her nonverbal signals. Suchdifficulties are all problems in functions of the right hemisphere. Weshall return to the issue of hemispheric specialization in the mind bothbelow and in the next chapter.
A common belief in everyday life is that there appears to be a
pattern of differences in emotion, especially the empathic sharing ofemotional states, between males and females. Developmental studieshave focused on the gender differences in relationships among friendsduring the school years. In general, these studies find “masculine”and “feminine” styles that most boys and girls, respectively, seem toexhibit.
90The masculine style has been defined as a form of mutual
assertion of one’s individual talents and skills. Boys’ interest in ath -Emotion 147

letic prowess is one example of such a form of shared assertion. The
feminine style has been described as one of mutual empathy; girls’interactions with each other tend to focus on shared expression andresonance with each other’s emotional experiences.
91Clearly, how -
ever, many girls have elements of the masculine style, and many boys
have elements of the feminine style. Although generalizations of anysort must be carefully examined, it is important to try to understandthe genetic, hormonal, developmental, and/or social factors that con -
tribute to such observable gender differences.
EMOTIONAL COMMUNICATION:
EMPATHY AND AFFECTIVE EXPRESSION
An important aspect of emotions is their social function. Emotions,
both primary and categorical, serve as the vehicles that allow oneperson to have a sense of the mental state of another. The capacity tofeel another person’s experience has many labels, such as “empathy,”“sympathy,” “mirroring,” and “attunement.” In its essence, the abil-ity of one mind to perceive and then experience elements of anotherperson’s mind is a profoundly important dimension of human experi-ence. We are a social species, and having the ability to “mind-read,”or having “mindsight,” lets us rapidly detect the emotional state ofanother. Why is this so important? There are several reasons. Thisform of communication allows us to perceive the intentions,attentional focus, and evaluation of events in others; it thereforeallows us to understand social interactions and anticipate the behav -
ior of other people. Our minds are capable of detecting the nonver -
bal signals of others, which reveal these internal aspects of their
states of mind. Young infants begin to differentiate between animateand inanimate objects in the world, attributing intention and emo -
tional responses to the former and not the latter. With the assign -
ment of intention, our minds are able to compare external behaviors
with implied internal motivational states.
92This ability allows us to
detect “cheaters” and note when we are being misled. A further evo -
lutionary benefit of mindsight is that our ancestors could rapidly
sense when a member of their own social group was detecting dan -
ger by the look on her face, her gestures, or her tone of voice. Those
social beings capable of such mindsight escaped danger more often,were less often tricked by the destructive motivations of others, and148 THE DEVELOPING MIND

thus were more likely to survive and pass on the capacity for such
state-to-state lines of communication.93
From a developmental perspective, the most utilitarian of these
benefits is that parents can sense the inner needs of their children andtherefore maximize the potential of their offspring’s survival. An -
other benefit of empathic attunement is that it creates an attachment
bond between parent and child, which provides a source of increas -
ingly complex layers of external and then internal security for the
growing child in the increasingly challenging world encountered ashe develops. The experience of being understood develops a mentalmodel or inner expectation that needs are important and goals areachievable. Also, the child’s system requires the parent’s attunementto help organize the child’s own mind. Positive emotional states areamplified and negative ones modulated within these attuned commu -
nications. As the child grows, these repeated alignments of mental
states allow him to develop a self-organizational capacity for autono-mous state regulation. Human infants have profoundly underdevel-oped brains. Maintaining proximity to their caregivers is essential,both for survival and for allowing their brains to use the maturestates of the attachment figure to help them organize their own men-tal functioning.
The subjective side of these emotional connections is that it
allows a sense of belonging to grow within the individual. “Feelingfelt” is the subjective experience of mental state attunement. Thepleasurable response to such a resonance of minds may be built intoour brains as a genetic inheritance of evolutionary history. For us associal animals, our having such a sense encourages group behavior,which has been of great survival value to our species as we evolved.It may also be the reason why large groups are experienced so differ -
ently from smaller ones, in which face-to-face eye contact and other
aspects of shared nonverbal communication are readily available.Committees of over a dozen people become unwieldy and inefficient(not that some smaller ones do much better!). Feeling felt for somerequires even smaller group settings, with one-to-one situations beingthe ideal for many people.
Empathic emotional connections require some way in which
internal states are expressed externally. Primates are the only groupof animals with muscle endings on the skin of the face; this gives usthe capacity for a huge assortment of facial expressions, which aredirectly controlled by our nervous systems.
94Our tremendously rich
enervation allows for exquisitely subtle and rapid alterations in facialEmotion 149

expression. To match this expressive ability, primates have neuronal
groups in the brain that are specialized to respond to faces, and alsoto particular facial expressions! As we’ve discussed, these neuronalgroups often rest in the value system circuits of our brains, such as inthe amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex. We are hard-wired to havemeaning and emotion shaped by the perception of eye contact andfacial expression.
95We are also hard-wired to express emotional
states through the face.
Complex neural/bodily aspects of emotional processes are not
easily translated into words. Nonverbal expressions, including thoseof the face, tone of voice, and gestures, can transfer informationabout internal states more fully to the outside world than words cando. Words go only so far. When anyone asks, “How are you feel -
ing?”, it is a huge translational challenge to turn such subtle and
dynamic neural processes into a verbal statement. Emotion can beseen as an energizing drive toward motion. Seeing what a persondoes, rather than asking her how she feels, can often be a moredirect road into the person’s emotional state. Nevertheless, we oftenfeel compelled to ask others how they feel. The social process of“talking about feelings” with each other is much more an interactiveevent than the mere telling of a linguistic message. Linguistic repre-sentations, such as the words “sad” or “angry,” are quite limited anddistant symbolic packets we send to each other in response to thequery, “How are you feeling?” The message is in the medium of howwe respond, not in the words alone.
96
The link between emotion and action is in the appraisal–arousal
foundation of these processes. At their core, appraisals define what isgood or bad, what should be approached or avoided. Children areoften more at ease with the hedonic tone of primary emotional statesthan with trying to define the categorical emotions they may beexperiencing. When children say, “I feel bad,” or “I feel good,” thismay be a very direct statement reflecting this basic aspect of theirappraisal system and primary emotional experience.
EMOTION AND THE HEMISPHERES
Affect can be expressed through facial expressions and through mod -
ulations in the tone and prosody of the voice. These nonverbal
aspects of language communication, in both their expression andperception, appear to be mediated predominantly by the right hemi -150 THE DEVELOPING MIND

sphere.97The body’s posture and movement can also blend with the
voice and facial expression in sending affective signals that arereadily perceived by other people. What is striking is the finding thatthe registration of the status of the body itself is also much morehighly integrated in the right hemisphere than in the left. As we’vediscussed briefly, even the regulation of the body’s autonomic ner -
vous system is primarily mediated by right-brain mechanisms.
98The
right hemisphere therefore appears to play a major role in mediatingemotional processes, as well as in permitting the expression of emo -
tional states and the conscious awareness of emotional experience.
For this discussion of emotion, it is important to provide some
background information. Appraisal and arousal occur on both sidesof the brain, as do other emotional processes. However, the subjec -
tive experience and the nature of emotion on either side of the brain
may be quite different. Leading theories propose a number of dispa -
rate views of emotions and brain asymmetry.
99One major perspective
is that of the valence hypothesis, which suggests that unpleasantemotions are processed on the right side and pleasant ones on theleft.
100Consistent with this suggestion is the view that withdrawal
states and processes are located on the right side, whereas approachstates and processes are located on the left.
101Another view is that
socially mediated emotions, such as guilt or the enactment of socialdisplay rules, are processed in the left hemisphere, whereas morebasic, spontaneous emotions are processed in the right hemisphere.
102
Still others argue that raw, intense emotional experience is primarilymediated via the right hemisphere.
103
From a neuroscientific view of emotion as a socially mediated
set of processes affecting all other mental processes, one can look toour basic elements of the mind as composed of the flow of energyand of information within the brain for insights into this dilemma ofmultiple theories. Primary emotional states are often directly ex -
pressed via nonverbal components of communication, including
facial expressions and tones of voice. Primary emotional states aredirectly shaped by bodily response and directly influence bodilyresponses. These two basic somatic functions of primary emotionshave been demonstrated to be mediated and perceived by the righthemisphere of the brain. Furthermore, in studies of patients withblocked communication between the two hemispheres, the left brainappears unable to register the facial expression of others. The rightbrain both perceives and sends messages through facial expressionsand tone of voice.
104It may therefore be fair to propose that the non -Emotion 151

verbal right hemisphere may be the location for the subjective aware -
ness and expression of primary emotions as we have defined them.
The processing of such emotions, however, is likely to be mediatedby both hemispheres.
Developmental studies suggest that in fact each hemisphere may
mediate quite different processes of engagement with the environ -
ment. As noted above, this may mean that approach is mediated by
the left hemisphere and withdrawal by the right. For example,behaviorally inhibited (shy) children reveal a dominance in rightfrontal electrical activity at baseline; more adventurous children dem -
onstrate left frontal activation. Nathan Fox has suggested that such
findings support the notion that characteristic emotional styles mayreflect profiles of frontal activation.
105Left frontal activation is asso -
ciated with active approach, positive affect, exploration, and socia -
bility. The absence of left frontal activation leads to an absence of
positive affect and the experience of depression. In contrast, rightfrontal activation leads to active withdrawal, negative affect, andfear/anxiety. Hypoactivation of the right frontal region leads to disin-hibition of approach, with impulsivity and hyperactivity. Such a viewcan explain some features of shy and of aggressive children and thechanges in their states as the context may alter their frontal activa-tion profiles.
Further developmental studies suggest that both constitutional/
temperamental and experience/attachment features may directlyshape these patterns of frontal activation.
106In the case of depressed
mothers, for example, there is a marked decrease in shared positiveaffect states, and the infants (and their mothers) are seen as with -
drawn. In both parents and children, there is a marked decrease in
left frontal activation. If such depression lasts beyond the first yearof life, the infants may continue to express this pattern of frontalactivity.
107
SUBJECTIVE EXPERIENCE
Emotion is inherently a subjective experience involving the evalua -
tion of meaning and the interaction with the environment. Experi -
ences evoke within us textured subjective states that create the fabric
of our lives and our relationships with others. Music has beendescribed as one of the purest expressions of emotions that exists. Itis filled with contours and spacing, varied intensities, and modula -
tions in sound. These could be considered as categorical features,152 THE DEVELOPING MIND

such as joy or sadness, but perhaps they are more appropriately
reflecting profiles of arousal so parallel to vitality affects that wecould call primary emotions the “music of the mind.” The process ofcreating and listening to music is a form of emotional experience andaffective communication.
Several studies, and my own informal survey of dozens of chil -
dren, reveal a common preference among unprofessionally trained
individuals for the left ear when listening to music.
108Sound heard
with the left ear may induce a more holistic sensation, a floating withthe flow of the music, quite distinct from the sensation produced bymusic heard with the right ear. How can this be? The left auditorynerve goes primarily to the right hemisphere! Though there is somecrossover, the auditory stimulation in the right brain appears toevoke a different sensation from that which goes to the left brainfrom the right ear.
We are filled with representations of all sorts: sensations and
images in a context-rich form mediated by the right hemisphere, andlinguistic symbols in a linear, logical, detail-oriented mode mediatedby the left hemisphere.
109If this view is true, then our daily conversa-
tions are filled with a blending of right-sided and left-sided commu-nication. Some authors argue that emotional attunement is funda-mentally right-brain-to-right-brain communication.
110This view may
sound too reductionistic and simple to be either true or useful. Butlet’s take a look at a fundamental notion of attunement: the feelingof another person’s experience. Merely to understand another personrequires an intellectual grasp of the other’s experience. To have theability to conceptualize the mind of another, as well as to perceivewhat the other’s subjective world might be like, requires special toolsenabling the kind of reflective functioning discussed in Chapter 3.The neurological bases of these tools have been established overthousands of years of evolution and are a fundamental part of thesocial circuitry of the brain so intimately related to emotional experi -
ence. These circuits are located primarily in the right hemisphere. To
feel another person’s experience requires the ability to take in theessential data of how the other person in fact is feeling by way ofspecific signals generated by this person. These data then directlyaffect the receiver’s state of mind. Would it be such a big surprise tofind that the neural processes of one hemisphere are best expressedexternally by that hemisphere, and then perceived best by the samehemisphere, but in another person? After all, words generated by theleft hemisphere of one person are best perceived and understood bythe left hemisphere of the listener. What we are really talking aboutEmotion 153

are the forms of information that the mind is processing. As we’ll
discuss more fully in the next chapter, the types of mental representa -
tions are quite distinct in each hemisphere. Learning about the
nature of these differences can give us a better understanding of emo -
tional experience and communication between minds.
Emotions recruit distributed clusters of neuronal groups in the
emerging states of mind that organize the systems of the brain.111
Recruitment can be generally defined here as a process that tempo -
rarily links distinct, differentiated elements into a functional whole.
In the brain, recruitment involves the binding of the activity of spa -
tially distributed neural circuits at a given moment and across time.
Emotion can be proposed to serve this integrative role by way of itsinvolvement of neuromodulatory systems that are themselves widelydistributed and have direct effects on neural excitability and activa -
tion, neural plasticity and the growth of synaptic connections, and
the coordination of a range of processes in the brain. We can suggestthat perhaps the most active representations may be the ones thatbecome recruited and then have the potential to enter the spotlight ofconscious awareness. Consciousness may in fact be quite distinct oneach side of the brain. Some authors have suggested that the righthemisphere is a master at representing social context, whereas theleft remains focused on details devoid of contextual meaning.
112The
social context of a situation determines the nature of action of theappraisal systems. Internal context, the history of present and recentrepresentational activity, also directly affects the way the appraisalsystems work. The impact of representational processes on each sideof the brain may create quite distinct contextual influences on theappraisal process and lead to distinct senses of conscious awareness.
The brain looks to the body’s response to “know how it feels.” An
experiment that illuminated this involved subjects being told to contorttheir facial muscles in specific patterns. Unbeknownst to them, theseconfigurations represented the various categories of emotions, such asanger, fear, or sadness. When they were presented with a standardizedstory, their appraisal of meaning was directly influenced by whichfacial musculature patterns they had activated. If their muscles wereheld in a sad way, they interpreted the story presented as sad. If theirfaces were held in a way to show joy, they had a “happy” reaction tothe same story. The finding that the right hemisphere has a more inte -
grated representation of the body, including the face, suggests that this
form of information will have more impact on the experience of emo -
tion on the right side of the brain.
By our second year of life we have learned the trick of how to154 THE DEVELOPING MIND

show facial affective expressions that are different from our internal
emotional states.113This form of social deception allows us to act in
socially appropriate and sanctioned ways. In a fundamental manner,this behavior creates a division between the private, internal self andthe public, external self. Most of us carry out this dual role every dayin our private and public lives. If we spend too much of our timeattempting to be “socially appropriate” by having a public self, anddo not express authentic feelings or thoughts, then we may be vul -
nerable to developing a “false self” quite distant from our actual pri -
mary emotional experience. Of note are findings suggesting that the
left hemisphere plays a more significant role in the communication ofemotions that conform to social rules.
114
As noted earlier, words are often quite limited in their ability to
convey our internal states. Attunement to one another’s nonverbalmeans of communicating emotional experience is a much more directand satisfying mechanism for joining with others. However, we mustuse words and concepts to attempt to understand the nature of emo-tion if we are to begin to comprehend the human mind. Some mightargue that without words, we cannot reflect on the conceptualnature of our own minds. As we’ve seen in Chapter 3, those parentswho have the capacity to reflect on the importance of mental statesare more likely to have secure attachments with their children. Thisreflective function is revealed in both affective attunements and theability of these individuals to state, in words, the importance of men-tal states in human experience.
115In fact, the ability to use “mental
state language”—words reflecting mentalizing concepts, such asbeliefs, feelings, attitudes, intentions, and thoughts—is associatedwith parents of children with secure attachments.
116These ideas can
inspire an approach to creating “reflective dialogues” with childrenin order to help them develop emotionally. In this way, having thecapacity for reflecting in one’s own mind on the importance of men -
tal life can be revealed in both attuned (nonverbal) and language-
based communication. Using both our nonverbal right and verballeft hemispheres, we can find ways to communicate the importantsubjective emotional experience of ourselves and others.
EMOTION REGULATION
Emotion is indeed a complex set of processes. As we’ve seen in thischapter, emotion is at the core of internal and interpersonal processesthat create our subjective experience of the self. The organization ofEmotion 155

the self is dependent upon the manner in which emotion is regulated.
Research on emotion regulation reveals that emotion as a set of pro -
cesses is both regulated and regulatory. That is, emotional processes
cannot exist without influencing other such processes and beinginfluenced themselves by other such processes. Thus the study ofemotion and that of emotion regulation go hand in hand.
117
Self-regulation—the manner in which the process called the
“self” comes to regulate its own processes—consists in part of theregulation of emotion. Sroufe describes the “twin tasks” of emotionin development as the expression of affect and its management. Hestates, “The ability to maintain flexibly organized behavior in theface of high levels of arousal or tension is a central aspect of stableindividual differences in personality organization.”
118
Susan Calkins has described pathways to such differences in emo -
tion regulation as involving both internal and external sources.119Inter-
nal features include constitutional aspects of neuroregulatory struc-tures (such as neuroendocrine, autonomic, and frontal lobe systems),
behavioral traits (such as attentiveness, adaptability, reactivity, sooth-ability, and sociability) and cognitive components (including social ref-erencing, beliefs and expectations, awareness of need for regulation,and ability to apply strategies). External features include interactivecaregiving patterns (responsiveness, cooperation, reciprocity, accessi-bility, support, and acceptance) and explicit training (including model-ing, reinforcement, and discipline).
In general, our skills at regulating emotion allow us to achieve a
wide range and high intensity of emotional experience while maintain -
ing flexible, adaptive, and organized behavior. The processes of emo -
tion regulation—and dysregulation—can involve any of the basic levels
of emotion: physiology, subjective experience, and behavioral change.As we’ll discuss in detail in Chapter 7, the regulation of emotioninvolves the modulation of states of mind. Regulation of the flow ofstates can involve internal (physiological and cognitive) and interactive(engaging with the social environment) elements. For example, alter -
ations in attentional focus, perceptual bias, or the evaluation of mean -
ing can directly change the course of elaboration of primary emotional
states into more differentiated categorical emotions. We can utilize thevery processes of emotion to regulate their flow.
Before we can appreciate the details of these complex regulatory
processes more fully, we will need to review what is known abouthow the mind constructs reality with representational processes(Chapter 5) and how states of mind are created within the complex156 THE DEVELOPING MIND

system of the mind (Chapter 6). Then we will be ready to wrestle
with the questions of how the brain organizes its own functioning,including how it regulates emotional states within itself and in con -
nection with others, in the creation of the mind.
REFLECTIONS: EMOTION AND THE MIND
An amusing cycle of responses sometimes enters the classroom when
a psychotherapy student or teacher asks the question “What is a feel -
ing?” “A feeling,” the response sometimes goes, “is an emotion. It is
what you feel when you are emotional. Emotions generate feelings.”An initial way out of this endless loop of confusion comes from theknowledge of how central these elusive things, these emotional pro -
cesses, are for human relationships. Emotions are the contents and
processes of interpersonal communication early in life, and they cre-ate the tone and texture of such communications throughout the life-span. This view at least brings emotions out of the individual andinto the interaction between people. But, still, this leaves us withonly a bit more clarity about the challenging task of how to defineemotions.
Everyday descriptions of what emotions are may seem to be
more appealing than trying to create seemingly restrictive, scientifi-cally derived concepts and definitions. Emotions are what allow usto fall in love. They are the stuff of poetry, art, and music. Emotionsfill us with a sense of connection to others. They link familiestogether; they remind us of who is important in our lives. Emotionsmake life worth living.
For some, the risk of becoming scientific about emotions is that
it has the potential to reduce the essential and passionate stuff ofsubjectivity into some neural-circuitry-based explanation that ap -
pears on the surface to be cold and useless. However, ironically, it
seems that the application of neural science principles to understand -
ing our feelings can actually expand and enrich the subjective experi -
ence of our own emotional minds. Understanding the neuroanatomic
reality of the convergence of social interactions, appraisal, and emo -
tional arousal helps us to see how the mind creates and is created by
interactions with other minds. We can now move beyond circulardefinitions and embrace the metaphors of emotion in a deeply impas -
sioned and integrated manner.
At the most basic level, the brain must have value systems thatEmotion 157

appraise the significance of internal and external stimuli. The centers
of these value systems, so often linked to areas that respond to socialsignals, act by initiating activity or arousal within specific circuits inthe brain. This chapter has provided a broad set of specific defini -
tions of emotion that can enable us to understand human experience
more fully. At its most basic level, this view sees emotions as the flowof energy, or states of arousal and activation, through the brain andother parts of the body. This process emerges from and directlyaffects the further processing of information within the mind by wayof the appraisal of meaning. Three phases can be identified: First, astimulus (internal or external) evokes a state of initial orientation,creating a sensation of “Something important is happening; payattention now!” This focus of attention is automatic and does notneed to involve conscious awareness. Next, the value systems of thebrain continue to appraise the meaning of that stimulus and of thatinitial orientation itself by means of elaborated appraisal and arousalprocesses and the activation of certain circuits. At this point, the sen-sation may begin to become “This is good” or “This is bad.” Thesefirst two steps of an emotional response contain activation profiles,such as surges of energy, that can be defined as “primary” emotions.In their essence, primary emotions are the beginning of how themind creates meaning.
Externally, primary emotions can be seen as vitality affects,
expressed by the contours of activation of the body, facial expres-sions, nonverbal gestures and tone of voice. These vitality affectsconstitute the primary connection between infant and parent. Thisfinding reveals the exquisite sensitivity of the appraisal centers tosocial interaction and shows how emotions are initially created with -
in our relationships with others.
A third phase in emotional response is what is more generically
thought of as “emotion”: the differentiation of initial orientation andelaborated states of arousal and appraisal into categorical emotions.Examples of such emotions found throughout the world in charac -
teristic expressions are sadness, anger, disgust, surprise, joy, fear, and
shame. The brain and other body systems appear to have commonpathways by which each of these distinct categorical emotional statesare physiologically manifested and expressed as categorical affects.
Generated by the value systems of the brain, these emotional
activations pervade all mental functions and literally create meaningin life. In this way, we can say that emotion and meaning are created
by the same processes.158 THE DEVELOPING MIND

Information processing involves the creation and manipulation
of cognitive representations. Attentional mechanisms direct the flowof information processing. Within perception and memory, theappraisal systems of the brain must label representations as signifi -
cant or value-laden. In this way, the appraisal and arousal pro -
cesses—the central features of emotion—are interwoven with the
representational processes of “thinking.” Creating artificial or didac -
tic boundaries between thought and emotion obscures the experien -
tial and neurobiological reality of their inseparable nature.
Energy flow is a basic aspect of primary emotions. As states of
mind emerge within the individual, the changing activations that cre -
ate them are often experienced as primary emotions. The regulation
of emotion, or the regulation of the flow of information and energywithin the brain, creates the self. The capacity to assess the personalsignificance of events and alter automatic, reflexive responses may becarried out by the prefrontal regions in a process we have calledresponse flexibility. When such an ability becomes integrated withother aspects of emotional and memory processing, the individualmay be able to generate a set of internal and interpersonal experi-ences that enables the self to have a flexible form of regulation. Inthe next two chapters, we will examine how the mind organizes itselfby how it regulates the flow of information and mental states bothwithin itself and with other minds. Emotion and its modulation arein this way a fundamental part of the information processing andenergy flow that are central features of the organization of the self.Emotion 159

THE DEVELOPING MINDRepresentations
CHAPTER 5
/fl2rt
Representations
Modes of Processing
and the Construction of Reality
Our experience of reality is constructed by the activity patterns of
neuronal groups within the brain. These groups are clustered intofunctional units capable of representing experiences in differentmodalities, such as sight or taste, words or sensations, abstract ideasor perceptual images. The ways individuals assemble particularneuronal activations within themselves or in interaction with otherpeople determine the nature of their subjective experience of reality.We can view communication within human relationships in part asthe ways in which these mental representations are shared. The pat -
terns of communication within early relationships directly shape the
development of the mind.
A frustrated wife looked at her confused husband and said,
“You never understand what I am talking about. All you know iswhat you have learned in books. You couldn’t read my face if yourlife depended on it!” To this challenge, the man responded, “I cantell from what you say that you’re probably not happy with me. But,you know, there are two kinds of people in this world: those who aretoo needy, and those who aren’t.” The wife got up and left the room.
How do people ever communicate with each other? How does
one mind “read” the signals sent by another? How are words and
160

nonverbal modes of communication, such as tone of voice and
facial expressions, processed differently by the brain? Why couldn’tthis husband respond to the emotional content of his wife’s mes -
sage? Insights into the answers to these questions come from the
ways in which people’s minds construct reality.
In this chapter, we explore these ways by examining how the
mind creates representations and processes information. The coupledescribed above clearly had a major problem in how each partnerconstructed and therefore experienced reality. By examining the dif -
ferent mental modules responsible for representing the world and
other people, we can begin to understand the foundations of thiscouple’s profound difficulties. As discussed briefly in Chapter 4, theindividual brain is divided into two halves that have distinctly differ -
ent mental representations and modes of processing. Asymmetry of
the brain exists in almost all mammalian species, is present in thehuman fetus, and is functionally evident in the behavior of thehuman infant long before complex cognition is available.
1The devel-
opmental origins of bilateral differences in the brain are deeplyrooted in our evolutionary and genetic history. The ways in whichsuch asymmetries influence our experiences—both internal and inter-personal—are explored throughout this chapter. The anatomic andfunctional separation between the two hemispheres permits theirprocesses to be quite independent at times, and it directly shapes theconstruction of subjective experience. Repeated patterns of neuronalactivations help to establish a continuity in the individual’s represen-tations of reality across time. How two individuals come to sharetheir individual representational worlds is a fundamental part of“feeling felt” and establishing a sense of interpersonal connection.
This chapter proposes that the different attachment patterns
described in Chapter 3 involve the recruitment of unique patterns ofneuronal group activations. For example, the emotionally distant
connection of avoidantly attached children with their dismissing par -
ents can be understood as involving primarily the linear, logical, lin -
guistically based mode of communication of the left hemisphere. Per -
sons in whom the left-brain mode of processing predominates have
been shown to be markedly deficient in the ability to read others’nonverbal communications and to sense the emotional expressions ofothers or of the self. Imagine what being in an interpersonal, emo -
tional relationship with such a person might be like. This may in
part have been what the wife in the example above was encounteringin her marriage. The experiential reinforcement of particular repre -Representations 161

sentational processes can become an engrained pattern in the way an
individual comes to experience the world. As we shall see, new formsof experiences within interpersonal relationships may evoke new rep -
resentational processes. This would be one of the aims of therapy for
this couple’s mismatch in representational processes.
INFORMATION PROCESSING
AND MENTAL REPRESENTATIONS
Within a simple but powerful computational model, the brain has
been viewed as a fundamental processor of information. The natureof the brain’s processing of information is captured by two funda -
mental ideas in this model: A mental symbol (that is, a pattern of
neural activation) contains information, and it creates an effect.
2
Cognitive science has provided a conceptualization of how particularsystems within the mind give rise to some fundamental buildingblocks of internal experience.
Though there is much debate about what the mind is, there is little
controversy about the mind’s innate ability to process information. Theelaborate circuitry of the brain is reflected in the many elegant ways inwhich it can process information: We can learn, note similarities anddifferences, make generalizations, categorize, associate, analyze, andcreate new combinations of information within the intricate firing pat-terns of our brains. These patterns are not random, but emerge fromthe arrangements of neural connections that are able to carry out spe -
cific kinds of processing. For instance, we have circuits responsible for
visual processing and others for the processing of the more abstractrepresentations of ideas.
Within this information processor, we experience desires and
beliefs that emanate from the meaning of mental representations. Whatis the nature of this representational language of the mind? At a verybasic level, the patterns of firing serve as codes or symbols that carry
information and cause events to happen in the brain. These eventsthemselves are patterns of neuronal activation, which in turn carry fur -
ther information.
3The processing of the codes or symbols—the essence
of information processing—is based on both the representational andcausal properties of the symbols themselves. This chain reaction of
symbols and events cascades into “cognitive processes” such as mem -
ory and abstract thought. In other words, the brain creates symbols
whose actions are themselves symbolic—they carry information.162 THE DEVELOPING MIND

How does the brain do this? By altering the activity rates of the
firing of neurons, the brain is able to establish a set of signals orcodes that serve as symbols as defined above. The term “mental rep -
resentation” has been used to designate such a mental symbol as cre -
ated by neuronal firing patterns.
4Changes in the rate of firing
(increases or decreases in the baseline firing rate of a given neuron orclusters of neurons) create a pattern of activation at a given moment.Even a representation is a dynamic process in the brain. Patterns oftransformation act upon these representations to further alter theirform and action within the brain. Such complex transformationalpatterns are called “cognitive processes.” These processes can makenew associations among representations, identify similarities and dif -
ferences, or extract global themes and principles from patterns of
representations over time. In this way, the brain generates new com -
binations and features of representations, which are further acted
upon by specific processes. This is the fundamental framework forthe computational mind; it takes place within specific neural path-ways in the brain.
Evolutionary pressures have required that the brain become spe-
cialized in its problem-solving skills. We inherit the genetically pre-programmed capacity for information processing of a particular sort.The brain cannot process all types of information; a given module ofthe mind is only able to handle certain kinds of information in spe-cific kinds of ways. For example, one requirement of living in thephysical world is to be able to represent specific objects and events.This can be seen in explicit memory, for example, as the encoding ofthe details of specific autobiographical memories or facts. One evolu -
tionary purpose of explicit memory has been to be able to represent
objects in space and time—a capacity that allowed our ancestors tofind hidden food or recall where an enemy might be lurking. Ourautobiographical memory may reflect this temporal and spatial rep -
resentational ability of the self in the physical world. At the other
extreme, the mind must be able to transform these particular eventsand facts into more generalized representations, in order to allowlearning and adaptation to repeated experiences with the world. Thisis seen in memory systems as implicit mental models, general auto -
biographical knowledge (for example, “When I was seventeen I was
unhappy”), and semantic concepts or categories of objects. Theseproperties of the specific versus the general can be seen in variousaspects of the mind’s specialized problem-solving skills. As we cometo generalize and abstract features from the originally perceptuallyRepresentations 163

based, input-driven representational process, our representational
processes become more complex. For example, we can have ideas of“freedom” and “justice,” which have their origins in physical realitybut contain far more complex and abstract features than spatial andtemporal representations permit.
The distinct modules of the mind, from sensory and perceptual
processing to abstract reasoning and the conceptualization of otherminds, are each designed to solve specific kinds of problems. Theydo this by creating and handling specific kinds of representations.Interaction among specific modules allows for the transfer of infor -
mation across modalities, as in the coordination of sight and hearing
or in the influence of implicit on explicit memory processing. Artistsand poets can extract meaning from sensory experiences, which theythen translate back into powerful symbols of more universal con -
cepts within a visual medium or the expressive use of words. In this
way, various layers of representational processes, from perceptualimages to abstract concepts, can become linked within a single expe-rience. The mind is governed by the ways in which these informa-tion-processing modules function and interact with one another. Themodules themselves are created by the activity of the brain. Thus thebrain’s information-processing modules and neural activation fea-tures both contribute to our subjective experience of mental function.
FORMS OF REPRESENTATIONS
AND SUBJECTIVE EXPERIENCE
The subjective experience of information processing can help to illus -
trate its relevance for understanding the mind. The information con -
tained within representations can be about many things. For example,
Steven Pinker describes a four-part division of representations as fol -
lows: visual images containing a two-dimensional pattern or mosaic;
phonological representations as a stretch of syllables in a string-likedisplay; grammatical representations carrying the information of nounsand verbs, phrases and clusters, stems, roots, phonemes, and syllables;and “mentalese,” the language of conceptual knowledge and themedium in which the gist of an idea is contained.
5Within this frame -
work, one can see that the mind may include codes for objects, words,
and other complex subjects. Other researchers have proposed a three-part division of representations into sensory–perceptual, conceptual(or categorical), and linguistic forms.
6Whatever perspective one takes,164 THE DEVELOPING MIND

it is clear that the mind has distinct information that it symbolizes, as
well as different modes of processing these specific forms of representa -
tions. The activation of each of these types, their interaction with each
other, and their accessibility to various states can help illuminate somebasic aspects of subjective experience. With a wide array of mental pro -
cesses, individual differences in experience, and a fundamental limita -
tion in how one person can know the subjective experience of another,
it may seem an impossible task to define how the mind represents infor -
mation and therefore constructs reality. We need to be able to have a
common language for communicating some of what is known aboutthe basic aspects of the mind’s processing of information. For the pur -
poses of this book, then, let us use a basic vocabulary of representation -
al processes as described below.
Sensation and Perception
A “sensory representation” contains information representing sensa-
tions, including input from the outside world, from the body, andfrom the brain itself. External sensory data include sight, hearing,olfaction, taste, and touch. These enter the body through sensoryreceptors in their respective areas. The signals then travel to thebrain, where they are usually processed first in the thalamus at thetop of the brainstem and then in their particular sensory areas in thecerebral cortex. Internal sensations include bodily motion and physi-ological status of the body (such as states of arousal, temperature,and muscle tension). These are registered in the somatosensory corti -
cal areas, which are especially integrated on the right side of the
brain. In general, a sensory representation is thought to have a mini -
mal amount of categorization; that is, input is registered in the brain
with relatively little “top-down” processing. A blast of sound, abright light, and a pressure on the skin of the arm are all examples ofstimuli that we may sense but be unable to classify into a previouslyexperienced representation, which we can then compare and contrastto prior experiences. We “sense” such stimuli, but we do not (yet)have a category or name for what they are. This is the closest wemay come to “the thing itself.” Even sensory representations are con -
structions of our nervous system’s ability, via our neurons and sen -
sory receptors, to translate stimuli into the code of distributed
neuronal activations within our brains.
A “perceptual” representation is a more complexly processed
unit of information than a sensory one. At the level of the sensorycortices, the brain analyzes and compares incoming information withRepresentations 165

memories from prior experience in order to categorize the sensations
into a perception. In contrast to a “basic” sensation, a percept is“symbolized”; it represents a constructed bit of information createdfrom the synthesis of present sensory experience with past memoryand generalizations contained within experientially derived mentalmodels. This is the essence of top-down processing.
In the strictest sense, even a sensory representation meets the literal
definition of a “symbol”—something that carries information aboutsomething other than itself. The sensations we have of putting ourhands in cold water are signals generated from the firing of our neuronsconnected to our temperature receptors in the skin of the hand. Thisfiring pattern is not the “cold” itself; it stands for “cold,” because it
comes from receptors that detect temperature in our skin. This patternis a basic code directly related to the sensory medium. In an extendeddefinition, however, some scientists refer to a more direct code as a“presymbolic” representation: It is as close to the thing itself as we canget before the mind does a lot of top-down categorizing and manipulat-ing of incoming data based on preconceived ideas and past experiences.I use the term “presymbolic,” because it will help remind us of thenature of information processing within the mind, and also because it isoften useful to distinguish these forms from those representations thatare more easily translated into words.
These presymbolic codes are generated from sensory receptors,
take in information from both the outside world and the body itself,and are initially encoded within the deeper structures of the brain.Some might argue that this brain activity is not part of the “mind,”often being at a nonconscious level and thought by some to bemerely an “automatic” function of the brain. However, thesepresymbolic representations, these less complex codes, serve a vitalfunction in influencing all other information-processing aspects ofthe mind.
The flow of processing from sensation to perception is influenced
by the state of mind at the time of sensing something. Mental statesprofoundly influence our construction of reality at this emerging sym -
bolic representational level. The mind constructs perceptual reality
from bits of selected information it receives through the senses, in com -
bination with extremely subjective and context-sensitive mental pro -
cesses, such as mental models and the influence of emotion. Some may
ask, “Does the outer world exist in any accurate and direct way in themind?” A good question! Internal mental experience is not the productof a photographic process. Internal reality is in fact constructed by the166 THE DEVELOPING MIND

brain as it interacts with the environment in the present, in the context
of its past experiences and expectancies of the future. At the level ofperceptual categorizations, we have reached a land of mental represen -
tations quite distant from the layers of the world just inches away from
their place inside the skull. This is the reason why each of us experi -
ences a unique way of minding the world.
Conceptual (or Categorical) Representations
In both sensation and perception, we may be aware of sensing or
perceiving various things, without the ability to describe them inwords. These forms of awareness are sensory and perceptual sym -
bols, which are considered “prelinguistic” representations. Another
type of prelinguistic symbol is a “conceptual” representation. It isthis form of encoding that carries information about more highlyprocessed entities, such as the gist of an idea, “reading between thelines” of a story, or notions of freedom and justice. These complexconceptual representations are an important part of the informationprocessing of the mind. They are not directly related to the externalworld and the derived sensory and perceptual representations, butare created by the computations of the mind in its interactions withthe world and other people within it. In this sense, sensory–percep-tual representations attempt to symbolize the physical world (exter-nal or internal); conceptual representations symbolize the mind’s cre-ation of ideas and of the mind itself. We can create complexrepresentations of the self, others, and the relationships we have.These conceptual representations are nonverbal. They form the fun -
damental building blocks of our thoughts, beliefs, and intentions,
and aspects of our explicit memories. We will see later in this chapterhow this ability to form complex representations allows the mind tocreate the concept of the minds of other people.
Although the actual word “concept” does not fully capture the
range of representations falling under this divisional framework, it isa useful term in contrast to “percept.” These conceptual representa -
tions appear to have no direct three-dimensional correlates in the
external world. How, for example, would the concept of “freedom”or “justice” be simply represented in the world? An artist may beable to portray these concepts in a visual form, but their status in themind may not be so easily linked to perceptual representations.
Another way of thinking of this is that the mind utilizes a cate -
gorical structure in which to classify and organize perceptual repre -Representations 167

sentations. (In fact, as described below, some authors use the term
“categorical” representations rather than “conceptual.”) For exam -
ple, we can generate a list of mammals that live in the ocean, or fish,
or living creatures that swim, or plants that live in water. In each ofthese categories, there is no single entity in the world that constitutesthe category. For instance, there is no such animal as a “mammal”;there are many individual species that fit into the overall classifica -
tion. These groupings certainly come from patterns observed by the
human mind. But in this way, they are abstract creations of themind, not direct perceptions of actual things in the world.
Linguistic Representations
“Linguistic” representations contain information about sensations,perceptions, concepts, and categories within the socially shared pack -
ets called words. Words themselves have physical properties; theycan be seen, heard, felt, spoken, and written. But words move
beyond the physical world and link the mental representationalworlds of separate people. We can throw mental representations outof our minds and into the air or onto the printed page, where theycan be detected by a receiver whose mind in turn activates “similar”packets of verbal representations. Human language permits informa-tion processing to be shared across individuals. The evolutionarybenefit of such an innate ability has been that it has allowed us associal beings to create cultural history and pass on knowledge acrossgenerations, across time, and across the huge space that existsbetween the minds of two people.
Information processing occurs automatically in the mind. The
brain’s activity occurs in patterns from specific regions that determinethe nature of the information being carried. These patterns result insubsequent neural activity, which itself contains information. Most ofthis process occurs without the participation of conscious awarenessand often is not translatable into linguistic representations.
Some people are more aware of certain layers of information
than other people are. For example, the capacity to conceptualize the“nature of a relationship” will vary quite a bit. Some individualsmay take the phrase and expound for hours on the patterns of theirrelating with others. Others will hear the phrase and may only beable to respond with “It is good” or “It is bad.” These individualsmay have the ability to form complex representations of relation -
ships, but these representations may be inaccessible to translation168 THE DEVELOPING MIND

into words. That is, such persons may be able to form very sophisti -
cated reactions to intricate social interactions, but may be unable to
describe the internal processes which have led to them. Still othersmay be quite “concrete” and be unable to make such abstract repre -
sentations.
Awareness of the body is another example of how people may
differ in their awareness of internal information processing. Theimportance of bodily responses in determining emotion and meaningmakes awareness of this form of information vital to grasp. Theways our functionally distinct modes of representational processinginteract with one another may be keys to understanding the block -
ages in information processing that are a part of mental dysfunction.
Such impairments in the flow of information can be seen, for exam -
ple, in the memory disturbances of individuals with posttraumatic
stress disorder. Altering the flow of information processing may be afundamental part of psychotherapy for these individuals. Also, beingable to put some of these representations into words may enable theindividuals to reflect on their history and alter the future outcome ofthe representations’ effects on the self.
CONSCIOUSNESS AND
REPRESENTATIONAL PROCESSES
Gerald Edelman has described a process by which the mind functions
through positive feedback loops that reinforce their own patterns offiring.
7This is called “reentry” and is based on the principle that
loops of reciprocal firing—in which one group of neurons activatesanother, which then in turn activates the original group—constitute amajor organizing process of the brain. One can visualize this as aform of interneuronal group “resonance.” Reentry stabilizes aneuronal firing pattern that allows for the subjective experience ofthe processing in that moment. At certain times, this stabilizing pro -
cess permits the activation of consciousness. Edelman has described a
form of “primary consciousness” as occurring when our basic sen -
sory–perceptual processes resonate with our conceptual ones (which
he terms “categorical” processes). This is the “remembered present,”giving us a sense of awareness and familiarity with something with -
out our being able to name it or to see it from a distanced temporal
perspective involving past and future.
In Edelman’s model, there are the three major forms of neuronalRepresentations 169

groups as summarized above which function as representational pro -
cesses; he describes these as “perceptual,” “categorical,” and “lin -
guistic.” Perceptual groups are activated in response to sensations
from the environment or the body. If the mind has experienced thesesensations before and has categorized them with larger informationalmeaning, then the neuronal groups for that category will also be acti -
vated. For example, if a child has never seen a dog before, the child’s
visual sensation of the canine will be experienced without a connect -
ed sense of “what it is.” If the child has seen pictures of dogs or
actual dogs before, the child will have remembered these and createda general category, or “schema,” for such a sight. In this case, shewill also have neuronal groups activated representing the category orconcept of “dog.” The simultaneous activation of perceptual (seeing
the dog) and categorical (having a category for “dog”) neuronalgroups is thought to produce the internal sensation called primaryconsciousness. There is an awareness of the sight as a familiar ani-mal, a “being in the moment” with such a sight, which heightens aninternal conscious sensation. This is the remembered present.
With the development of language, Edelman argues, the neur-
onal groups responsible for linguistic processing allow a differentform of consciousness to emerge. When the more experienced olderchild sees the animal, the perceptual groups activate the categoricalones, and she has a primary consciousness of the dog. With lan-guage, the neuronal groups with the linguistic representation of“dog” also become active. The simultaneous activation of the cate-gorical and linguistic neuronal groups yields a “higher-order con -
sciousness” in which the child is freed from the prison of the remem -
bered present and is able to reflect both backward and forward in
time. In this view, it is our unique language capacity as humans thatallows us to be both historians and actuaries, reflecting on the pastand consciously planning for the future.
Others, such as Wheeler, Stuss, and Tulving, might argue that
such a form of cross-time representation is a fundamental part ofautonoetic consciousness.
8We might go on to suggest that such a
form of mental time travel is not dependent upon linguistic represen -
tation, but rather on the mind’s capacity to represent the self as expe -
rienced. For example, the developmental acquisition of autonoetic
consciousness may be more a function of the child’s developing self-awareness and understanding of perceptual processes that permitexperiential awareness than of linguistic abilities alone.
9In this way,
autonoetic consciousness is a function of an individual’s understand -170 THE DEVELOPING MIND

ing of minds, linking it, as we’ve discussed in earlier chapters, to the
integrating processes of the prefrontal regions, including social cogni -
tion, response flexibility, and working memory. As Buckner suggests,
however, the specific circuits of the prefrontal area of the brain maycarry out quite distinct processes mediating aspects of autonoeticconsciousness.
10What role the left-hemisphere linguistic processing
centers may play in the encoding via left orbitofrontal mediation ofepisodic memory, or in its retrieval via right-hemisphere processes,has yet to be elucidated. In general, the capacity to reflect on the selfacross time—with or without linguistic representations—may be con -
sidered as an extremely evolved, “higher-order” form of conscious -
ness. As we’ll see, the development of such a capacity may be inti -
mately influenced by early interpersonal relationships.
Consciousness, as we’ve discussed in Chapter 4, is a subject of
great interest and impassioned debate among academicians rangingfrom philosophers to neuroscientists. Consciousness has two dimen-sions: access to information, and the sentience or subjective quality
of an experience. In both of these realms, information processing andmental representations play a central role in determining the natureof our conscious experience. For example, access consciousness cancontain within it the awareness of sensation or perceptions, as wellas focal attention to aspects of the internal world, including theexperience of emotional processing and our beliefs, wishes, andintentions. The sentience of these representations will depend uponthe nature of their integration and the information they encode:whether we associate from memory and with conscious awarenessthe tones of music, the rough surface of a sheet of sandpaper, orreflections upon the various textures and sensations of memories wehave of our early days (for example, learning to swim). But this divi -
sion of consciousness into access and sentience dimensions doesn’t
fully explain the subjective experiences of consciousness. Someauthors argue that perhaps nothing truly can.
11
Fortunately, this is not an insurmountable problem for our
examination of the developing mind. We can in fact gain a deepappreciation of the differences between people in the qualitativeways in which life is experienced. For example, we will discuss soonhow those with a history of avoidant attachment seem to have mini -
mal access to the nonverbal signals that reflect primary emotional
states. Such an absence is seen in their frequent lack of awareness ofother’s emotions, and perhaps of their own emotions as well. Byexamining which representational processes are utilized to perceiveRepresentations 171

such states in others and in the self, we can begin to understand
what may be missing or impaired in these individuals. Internal sub -
jective experience may vary, depending upon which systems of repre -
sentation are activated at a particular time. By definition, subjective
experience implies the unique, internal quality of an experience.Understanding how these representational processes are integratedand then bound to the 40-Hz sweeping process and the activity ofthe lateral prefrontal cortex, discussed in Chapter 4, will enable us tomove more deeply into a view of how individuals may differ in thefundamental ways in which they live. In this way, we will utilize thisview of information processing to understand some aspects of thequalitative, subjective experience of the mind.
MODES AND MODULES
At the most fundamental level, the activity of the brain’s circuitrycreates patterns of activation that serve as symbols, which both rep-resent information and cause further mental processes to occur.These processes themselves represent information. This is the infor-mation processing of the mind. The difference between the distinctforms of representations lies both in the patterns of firing and in thelocalization of the neural circuits being activated.
For example, sensory representations are created within the cir-
cuits linked directly to the outside world and to the body. Perceptualrepresentations are established as these earlier sensory inputs are pro -
cessed and transformed into more complex representations. The vari -
ous layers of the sensory cortex—for example, in visual processing—
reveal that they serve as pattern recognition modules capable of fir -
ing off with a match between, say, a set of angles and contrasts when
one is visualizing a “table.” The location of this representation of thetable in the visual cortex helps define its visual quality. Conceptualrepresentations are even further distilled (processed, transformed)away from the world of objects. These more complex and abstractsymbols are thought to emanate from the activity of the neocortex.Linguistic representations—words and their various elements andcombinations—constitute the modality of specific regions in the lefthemisphere. The nonverbal intonations or prosody of spoken lan -
guage are thought to emanate from the activity of the right hemi -
sphere. Overall, the localization of processing lends a unique qualita -
tive sensation to our experience of mental representations.
Cognitive neuroscience describes the notions of mental “mod -172 THE DEVELOPING MIND

ules,” “modes,” “systems,” and “processes.” These ideas (which are
discussed in greater detail in Chapter 6) imply a separateness that mayemanate from the neuroanatomically distinct sites in which mental rep -
resentations are created and processed. Like the intricate interconnec -
tions within the brain itself, which interrelate the functions of numer -
ous circuits, so too do the mental modules of the mind act
interdependently. For example, representations within implicit mem -
ory may often act upon us without conscious awareness.
12The general -
izations of implicit memory, our mental models of the past, can directly
shape our active perceptions and explicit memory. Here we see two
“independent” modes of processing having an influence on each other.Undoubtedly such influences reside in not-yet-determined neural con -
nections between these two complex systems of the brain.
DEVELOPMENTAL PROCESSES
AND BRAIN ASYMMETRY
We have seen how mental experience emerges from the activation of
different circuits within the brain. Emotion has been defined as a setof processes involving, most importantly, the appraisal of informa-tion and the arousal of energizing activations. How the mind createsrepresentations and places value on them is inextricably linked withemotional processes. Though we use these terms for didactic pur-poses, there is no true dichotomy between “cognition” and “emo-tion.” Brain structure and function give rise to the integrated com -
plexity of mental life. In fact, infant studies suggest that we can
examine how the intrinsic features of the developing brain may cre -
ate specific forms of representations via neural specialization present
at birth, such as brain asymmetry.
Colwyn Trevarthen, who has studied infants and brain asymme -
try for decades, suggests:
Psychology and brain science come together in the scientific analy -
sis of cerebral localization of function. Asymmetries of function,
correlated with the deeply separated left and right cerebral hemi -
spheres, have particular value in the opening up of an approach to
mental activities at the highest level. Cognitive and voluntary pro -
cesses that attain maturity only after many years and that have
special importance in cultural life tend to be asymmetric in thebrain. The basis for this asymmetry seems to be set down veryearly, probably in fetal stages. It becomes elaborated in the subse -Representations 173

quent development of the brain. Throughout childhood, as the
brain takes up the lessons of experiences, and even in the moment-to-moment adjustments of adult consciousness, structures beneaththe cortex continue to exercise their regulations. They assist in thedevelopment of a bihemispheric system in which the two sideshave complementary roles.
Finally, completing the picture, we find evidence that the
intrinsic regulators of human brain growth in a child are speciallyadapted to be coupled, by emotional communication, to the regu -
lators of adult brains of people who know more. This seems to be
the key generic brain strategy for cultural learning that takes placenot in single brains, but in communities of them. Developmentalbrain science will have great importance in future efforts to under -
stand the growing human mind, and the life of ideas and beliefs in
human communities.
13
Trevarthen proposes an “intrinsic motive formation,” which
emerges in the embryo brainstem and regulates asymmetries in the
development and functioning of the cerebral cortex.14Within the
brainstem are interneuronal systems that carry out aspects of sensoryintegration; that coordinate motivational states and motoric actionpatterns; and that develop linkages to the important regulatory struc-tures of the hypothalamus, basal ganglia, and amygdala. These arethe brain circuits that constitute the intrinsic motive formation,which is proposed to exist even before cortical neurons develop.These essential and asymmetric elements of the emotional, motor,and motivational systems are in place long before the “higher” repre -
sentational neocortex is formed.
Indeed, the cognitive systems exhibiting the most distinct asym -
metry are thought to exist between intake and output circuits and
the emotional processing limbic region of the brain; again, this viewemphasizes the interweaving of emotion and cognitive processing.Trevarthen goes on to state:
Human cerebral asymmetry at the level of neocortical cognitive
processes that take up and store experience develops from adeeper and more ancient asymmetry in regulatory motive struc -
tures that both control morphogenesis of the brain in the embryo
and guide the infant into skilled action and an understanding ofthe motives and ideas of other members of the cooperative com -
munity. Expression of motives and emotions between young chil -
dren and their caregivers and companions regulates the acquisition
of sense in the human world.
15174 THE DEVELOPING MIND

Numerous lines of research suggest that the hemispheres differ
in the predominance of those neurotransmitters that regulate atten -
tion, motor behavior, approach–withdrawal, and self-regulation.
From the embryonic stage onward, there appear to be remarkabledifferences in “intrinsic motives,” the driving forces behind both in-the-moment processing and developmental trajectories. Trevarthenproposes that the left hemisphere tends to have an “assertive” moti -
vational state governing active engagement with the world of others,
as seen in the finding of the infant’s right-hand gestures and cooingvocalizations in response to the mother’s speech (each of which isleft-hemisphere-mediated). In contrast, the right hemisphere is pro -
posed to be more “acceptive” —that is, receptive and self-regulatory—as
evidenced by the infant’s left handed self-touching and the righthemisphere’s being better developed than the left and responsive tothe prosody of “motherese” (nonverbal, sing-song quality of tone ofvoice). These findings are supported by the notion that the left hemi-sphere is more active in motor expression and “approach,” mediatedby activity of the neurotransmitter dopamine. The right hemisphere,in contrast, mediates “withdrawal” in social situations and is moreinvolved in attentive and reflective states, mediated by activity of theneurotransmitter noradrenaline.
16
Tucker, Luu, and Pribram offer a complementary view of the re-
lation between circuitry and representational asymmetries. Theseauthors review the development of two “streams” of informationthat have evolved between the cortex and deeper structures via thefrontal lobes. In an “archicortical trend” or “dorsal pathway,” thereis an emphasis on certain types of cells and on noradrenergic activity.In a “paleocortical trend” or “ventral pathway,” there is the involve -
ment of different regions and a predominance of dopaminergic activ -
ity. Though each of these trends is present on both sides of the brain,
the dorsal pathway appears to be predominant on the right side ofthe brain, and the ventral pathway on the left side. Tucker and col -
leagues suggest that
these two limbic–cortical pathways apply different motivational
biases to direct the frontal lobe representation of working memory.The dorsal limbic mechanisms projecting through the cingulategyrus may be influenced by hedonic evaluations, social attach -
ments, and they may initiate a mode of motor control that is holis -
tic and impulsive. In contrast, the ventral limbic pathway from the
amygdala to orbital frontal cortex may implement a tight,Representations 175

restricted mode of motor control that reflects adaptive constraints
of self-preservation. In the human brain, hemispheric specializa -
tion appears to have led to asymmetric elaborations of dorsal and
ventral pathways. Understanding the inherent asymmetries ofcorticolimbic architecture may be important in interpreting theincreasing evidence that the left and right frontal lobes contributedifferently to normal and pathological forms of self-regulation.
17
Tucker and colleagues review the findings that the ventral path -
way (dominant on the left side) has a motivational bias toward spe -
cific details of objects and involves a feedback system whereby repre -
sentations of present perceptions have a high degree of tight
monitoring of the generation of behavioral output. Such a feedbackprocess lends itself to object perception and competence in analyticprocessing, which may “be especially involved in object memory andthe fine-tuning of the neocortical representation of objects whetherthe objects are conceptual or perceptual.”
18In contrast, the dorsal
stream of information (dominant on the right side) involves spatialand context representations that rely on a “feedforward” or pro-jectional mode of motor control, which activates arousal of attentionand memory processes in response to novel situations and favors“impulsive” or spontaneous behavioral output. Such a projectionalmode is also thought to involve representations of the future. Thisdorsal stream incorporates information from the body itself (auto-nomic activity and the state of viscera and smooth muscles), whichmakes it “well suited to evaluate stimuli for their motivational signif -
icance in relation to internal states.”
19
We therefore see a parallel in viewpoints that the right hemi -
sphere plays a dominant role in autonoetic consciousness, which
involves a sense of self (internal states, state of the body), context,and time as these can be represented in the past and projected intothe future. The predominance of the dorsal stream in the right hemi -
sphere in this way establishes the motivational formation that drives
the creation of autonoetic representations of the self through time.These views allow us to understand the notion of “cognitive repre -
sentations” in a developmental light: Neocortical capacities to repre -
sent reality between perception and action emerge in the setting of
powerful and asymmetric intrinsic motivational factors built into thestructure and function of the brain. These motivational systems influ -
ence embryonic growth and postnatally depend on interpersonal
experiences for their continued differentiation. We shall see that176 THE DEVELOPING MIND

these genetically driven asymmetries create their own subjective and
interpersonal effects on human experience.
MODES OF PROCESSING:
CEREBRAL ASYMMETRY
AND “DICHOTOMANIA”
Literature on the two hemispheres of the brain reveals the fascinating
origins of the awareness of our distinct ways of knowing about theworld.
20An early form of research into these modes focused on the
experiences of patients with epilepsy who had to undergo a proce -
dure that cut the connections between the two hemispheres in order
to control their seizures. In these people, called “split-brain pa -
tients,” the corpus callosum was severed, resulting in the functionalisolation of the left and right halves of the brain. Researchers were
then able to present either half of such a patient’s brain with stimuliand study the patient’s responses. A second prevalent source of infor-mation has been research on patients with anatomic lesions (tumors,strokes) in one hemisphere or the other. Their deficits demonstratepatterns of disrupted functioning implicating the central importanceof processes specific to a particular side of the brain. A third sourceof insights has been ingenious experimental designs devised to exposeonly one hemisphere of the brains of normal subjects to stimuli. The“unilateral” response in these situations has provided more data sup -
porting the notion of hemispheric specialization. More recently, a
fourth type of research utilizing brain imaging studies has contrib -
uted to the examination of hemispheric laterality by following the
activity of normal subjects’ brains during various procedures. Thesestudies have revealed patterns of activation that tend to confirm thefindings from the earlier forms of investigation.
Springer and Deutsch, in reviewing the scientific studies investi -
gating bilaterality, approach this topic by examining the methods
and results from an array of research approaches in order to offerthe data prior to any unwarranted generalizations.
21They caution
against a trend they call “dichotomania,” in which popular writershave extended the scientific findings far beyond even the implicationsof the data. For example, whole cultures have been accused of beingonly “left-brained” or “right-brained,” without an acknowledgmentof the usual bilateral participation of the hemispheres in the vastRepresentations 177

array of mental processes. The temptation to focus on two distinct
modes of processing has its historical roots. Philosophers have longnoted the differing styles of knowing about the world; they have con -
trasted creative, synthetic, emotional, intuitive, and nonconscious
patterns with those of critical, analytic, intellectual, rational, andconscious modes of thought.
There may be a very basic reason for this long history of seeing
dichotomies in human experience. As we’ve discussed, the anatomicstructure and neurochemistry of the two halves of the brain aresomewhat distinct.
22But even more than mere anatomy and physiol -
ogy, the processes that have now been identified to be dominant in
the functioning of each hemisphere generally support the philoso -
phers’ observations. The essence of the findings from the varied and
careful studies of laterality is as follows. The brain, including theamygdala and orbitofrontal cortex (responsible for the assignment ofmeaning to stimuli), the hippocampus (the major center for con-scious, declarative, explicit memory processing), and the lateralprefrontal cortex (thought to be a primary center for focal, consciousattention), is divided into two halves. At various points, bands of tis-sue, including the corpus callosum and the anterior commissures(and, indirectly, the cerebellum), connect the left and right halves ofthe brain. The uppermost part of the brain is called the cerebrumand includes the area called the neocortex, where complex thinkingis believed to reside. Each half of the upper brain can be referred toas a “cerebral hemisphere.” In this book, the terms “right” or “left”as applied to brain, cortex, hemisphere, side, or mode refer in gen -
eral to the specialized anatomy or functions of that side of the entire
brain: from the abstract processes at the top of the brain, to themore basic physiological and sensory ones lower down, emanatingfrom the brainstem. As we’ve discussed above, asymmetries existwithin the brainstem and limbic system long before neocorticaldevelopment. These intrinsic differences may have direct effects onthe unfolding of asymmetric representational capacities, including themore abstract processes of the neocortex. The predominance of theventral or dorsal pathways within each hemisphere may shape themotivational bias of attention and memory within that stream ofinformation. Although certain functions appear to be specialized ineach half, the normal functioning of the mind involves “cross-talk”between the two sides of the brain. The connecting tissue betweenthe hemispheres appears to be important for both mutual activationand inhibition of corresponding (“homologous”) cerebral centers on178 THE DEVELOPING MIND

either side of the brain. As we’ll explore, the way in which modes of
processing interact with each other cooperatively, interact con -
flictually, or remain rigidly dis-associated may play a large role in the
qualitative experience of mental functioning and well-being.
The following is a generally accepted description of the pro -
cesses in which each cerebral hemisphere specializes. In the right
hemisphere are fast-acting, parallel (simultaneously active), holisticprocesses. The right side specializes in representations such as sensa -
tions, images, and the nonverbal polysemantic (multiple) meanings of
words. These nonverbal representations are often called “analogic.”Visuospatial perception is an example of such an analogic functionspecialized on the right side. Note that the traditional verbal–nonver -
bal distinction between the left and right hemispheres is not com -
pletely accurate. Examples of this include the contribution of the
right hemisphere for understanding metaphor, paradox, and humor.Also, the reading of stories activates both left- and right-hemisphereprocesses more readily than the reading of scientific texts, which pri-marily activates the left hemisphere.
23
On the left side of the brain are more slowly acting, linear,
sequentially active, temporal (time-dependent) processes. Verbalmeanings of words, often called “digital” representations, are a pri-mary mode of processing for the left side. The left hemisphere isthought to utilize monosemantic “packets” of information as basicrepresentations, which are then processed in a slower, linear mode.Examples of linear processing are reading the words in this sentence,aspects of conscious attention, and determining the sequence ofevents in a story. Our language-based communication is dominatedby this linear mode of expression and reception of “bundled” bits ofsymbols, which carry restrictive definitions and relatively clearlydemarcated chunks of information. This is quite distinct from theanalogic representations seen, for example, in an artist’s painting orin a photograph. We can translate these analogic components of theworld into digitalized forms within words, but the translation isnever complete. In this way, some authors argue that the right hemi -
sphere more fully “sees the world for what it is,” whereas the left
hemisphere must reduce the world much more into mentally defined,often socially constructed chunks of information.
These distinctions have their developmental origins in infancy, as
we’ve discussed above: The right hemisphere is dominant for theprosodic aspect of “motherese” and appears to be more involved inacceptive, receptive, and self-regulatory motor activity. In contrast,Representations 179

the left hemisphere is involved in actively asserting communications
via the right hand; these are more outwardly oriented, approach/assertive motor activities.
24One can propose a perhaps simplistic but
useful generalization here that the left hemisphere is motivated forexternally focused attention and action, whereas the right is moti -
vated for internally focused attention and action. As neocortical rep -
resentations emerge between perception (input) and action (output)
in the form of thought and memory processes, we can see that suchcore asymmetries in motivational factors will bias each hemisphereto develop distinct capacities for complex representations. On the leftare the semantic memory representations of objects in the world,which can be manipulated and communicated to others as distinctpackets of information. On the right is the internal world of themind—both of the self and of the other—as the primary subject ofmemory representations within episodic memory and social cogni -
tion. The “theory of mind,” or capacity for “mindsight” and for rep-resenting mental states of others and the self, is the stuff of right-
hemisphere representations. Intentions, beliefs, attitudes, perceptions,memories, and feelings are represented in analogic forms that are noteasily reduced to digital packets of information.
Studies of laterality have also suggested the following findings,
which have a bit fewer numbers of subjects and therefore feweravailable data supporting their universal acceptance. The right hemi-sphere is considered to work as a pattern recognition center, assess-ing the gestalt and context of input from a synthetic mode of pro-cessing. The left, in contrast, uses logical and analytical processing toconstruct its detail-based representation of reality. Because of thesedifferences in processing, writers have often summarized the contrastbetween right and left as that between the intuitive and the rational,between context and text, and between the monosemantic and thepolysemantic meanings of words.
25
Michael Gazzaniga and colleagues suggest that the left hemi -
sphere is primarily responsible for “syllogistic” reasoning, in which
the mind searches for causal explanations about events and reachesconclusions based on limited information.
26The right hemisphere
lacks such a drive to explain; rather, it “sees things as they are withlittle alteration.”
27Gazzaniga has used the term “the interpreter” to
describe the process of the left hemisphere’s attempts to use reason toexplain cause–effect relationships in the limited pieces of informationwith which it is provided. In split-brain patients, the left hemispherehas been shown to weave fanciful tales to explain its perceptions.180 THE DEVELOPING MIND

Such narratives, Gazzaniga and colleagues argue, are driven by the
interpreter’s need to create an explanation even in the face of quitelimited data. Under normal conditions, such sustained syllogistic rea -
soning allows us to try to explain how things function and why the
world is the way it is. In this manner, the left hemisphere is the cen -
ter of the cognitive machinery that attempts to explain events and
therefore, in Gazzaniga’s view, is the primary motive to narrativethinking. In later chapters, we will return to this notion of an “inter -
preter” and its contribution, together with that of right-hemispheric
processes, to the production of autobiographical narratives andattachment patterns.
More fanciful authors have extended these general dichotomies
to less well-accepted philosophical notions such as that of the righthemisphere as the origin of Eastern thought and the left hemisphereas the source of Western philosophical views. Psychological workshave suggested that the right hemisphere is the center of the “uncon-scious” and that the left hemisphere is the origin of “conscious -ness.”
28Although these views indeed may be useful and perhaps have
an essence of truth, their blind acceptance can limit a more carefulapplication of the scientific findings to understanding subjectiveexperience. An important example is in the generalizations oflaterality and emotion.
ASYMMETRY AND EMOTION
The most common (and oversimplified) notion in the popular litera -
ture on psychology is that the intuitive, nonverbal right hemisphere
is the source of all emotion. If this idea is taken literally, it does notleave much room to explore the various shades of emotionalresponse woven throughout all internal processes on each side of thebrain. Emotion exists on both sides of the brain. Research on emo -
tion, for example, demonstrates the intimate influence of emotion on
all cognitive processes, from attention and perception to memory andmoral reasoning.
29Examination of the actual scientific data available
on the nature of emotion and laterality can shed some fascinatingand useful light on the topic, and can help us move further in under -
standing the development of the mind.
In the various studies of emotion and hemispheric specialization,
the right hemisphere appears to be primarily responsible for thereading of social and emotional cues from other people, and for theRepresentations 181

external expression of affect by the individual. For example, the left
side of the face, controlled preferentially by the right side of thebrain, has been shown to express more emotion than the other side.
30
Studies of patients with right-hemisphere deficits also suggest thatattentional mechanisms may be dependent on the right prefrontalcortex.
31Recall that appraisal and arousal, which constitute the sec -
ond and central phase of emotional response, alert the brain to focus
attention on stimuli labeled as “important.” Anatomically, the rightside has a slightly higher density of neuronal interconnections thanthe left. As discussed earlier, what is particularly fascinating is thatthe right cortex also contains a more integrated somatosensory repre -
sentation of the body, including the state of tension of the body’s vol -
untary muscles and positions of the arms and legs. This finding, plus
the presence of representational input from the body’s viscera (heart,lungs, intestines)—the somatic markers—in the right orbitofrontalcortex, suggests that the right hemisphere is more capable of havinga sense of the body’s state. It may indeed be the right hemispherethat is capable of sensing a “gut reaction” to something.
32Emotions
are directly influenced by the right brain’s representations of thebody’s changing states. The sensations experienced as visceral repre-sentations in the right hemisphere may be quite difficult to translateinto the words of the left hemisphere. The “language of the righthemisphere,” the nonverbal representations, may be a more directmeans of both being aware of and expressing primary emotionalreactions.
The right hemisphere, via the orbitofrontal cortex, also appears
to be more capable than the left hemisphere of regulating states ofbodily arousal.
33This suggests that whatever factors directly impinge
on right-hemisphere processing, such as bodily input or nonverbalemotional expressions in the voices, body signals, and facial reac -
tions of others, may have a direct impact on a person’s own emo -
tional state before the involvement of a linguistically based con -
sciousness or a rational, linear analysis of an ongoing experience.
34
The right brain will thus be more immediately involved in the reg -
istration of the somatic markers that make up part of an emotional
experience. Control of the body’s response will also be located primar -
ily on the right side. For these reasons, primary emotions—the textured
emotional states resulting from initial orientation, appraisal, andarousal—are likely to be experienced more immediately and intenselyon the right than on the left. However, appraisal and arousal circuits,the value centers of the brain, are located on both sides. For these rea -182 THE DEVELOPING MIND

sons, it is fair to say that both sides of the brain are filled with meaning
and emotional processes. The qualitative ways in which each hemi -
sphere is influenced by these neuronal activations—the essence of pri -
mary emotions—may be quite distinct because of the representational
processes that are unique to each side.
Studies of emotion and bilaterality have led to several different
theoretical models. At this point, there is no clear view of some sim -
ple way in which emotion is asymmetrically processed. One view is
based on emotional intensity: It holds that the right hemisphere isable to generate and experience more intense emotion than the left.States of high arousal, ranging from intense joy to rage, are thoughtto be products of the right hemisphere. More regulated, even-keelemotional states of mild interest and calm are thought to be the lefthemisphere’s range of affective experience.
35
Another model of emotion and asymmetry is based on hedonic
tone orvalence. Studies have suggested that negative, uncomfortable
emotions are the products of the right hemisphere.36For example,
patients with overactive right-sided functioning may experienceintense sadness, anger, or anxiety. Left-sided overactivation, in con-trast, yields states of happiness and contentment. Popular extensionsof these studies might call the right hemisphere pessimistic and theleft optimistic. There is much controversy over this distinction, inthat studies suggest a role of inhibition of the asymmetric cortico-limbic dorsal and ventral pathways, rather than merely an activationof one side or the other.
37Furthermore, each hemisphere may be
involved in contralateral inhibition—and thus lesion studies thathave been interpreted to reveal, for example, negative affect on theright side may actually be demonstrating release of the inherent emo -
tion of the opposite side of the lesion. Nevertheless, there is some
agreement that emotions eliciting approach behaviors are experi -
enced on the left side and emotions producing avoidance are pro -
cessed on the right.
38This view is supported by the notion that moti -
vational factors are asymmetric from prenatal development onward,
and that the value systems on each side of the brain push experienceand development in specific directions.
Another view is based on a distinction between “social” and
“basic emotions.”
39Social emotions—adaptations of emotional states
to meet the needs of social situations—are thought to be functions ofthe left hemisphere. In this model, basic emotions include both pri -
mary and categorical emotions as these have been defined in Chapter
4; they are the value responses to internal or external events and areRepresentations 183

thought to be products of the right hemisphere. In this view, sadness,
anger, fear, disgust, surprise, interest/excitement, enjoyment/joy, andshame are all part of the right hemisphere’s processing. Displayrules—the culturally transmitted lessons about which, and how, emo -
tions can be expressed in social settings
40—determine the social
appropriateness of affective expression and are presumably mediatedby the left hemisphere. This view is consistent with the notion pro -
posed earlier that the left hemisphere has an inherent external bias
toward attention and memory processing, whereas the right is biasedtoward internal mental experience. Spontaneous motor output, thedirect expression of internal states via affective signals, is a productof the right hemisphere. The tightly controlled, routinized output ofsocial display rules is a product of the left hemisphere in this model.
CONSCIOUSNESS AND LATERALITY
Though the popular literature and other publications sometimes callthe right hemisphere the “seat of the unconscious,” each hemisphere
may have its own conscious and nonconscious processes. Both hemi-
spheres may sometimes function in a quite distinct and isolated fash-ion; at other times there may be an integration within bihemisphericfunctioning. Consciousness in general may be qualitatively different onthe left and on the right, because the connection of working memorywithin the lateral prefrontal cortex and the 40-Hz thalamocorticalsweeping process will recruit and have available to it representationswhich are distinct in character within each hemisphere. The associa -
tional processes thought to underlie conscious experience may also be
quite different on each side of the brain. It is therefore reasonable tosuggest that there may be a right-brain and a left-brain form of con -
sciousness. Both hemispheres can become involved as a “supersystem”
in which consciousness recruits various neuronal groups across thehemispheric connections, leading to a bihemispheric form of con -
sciousness. We can call this a form of “interhemispheric resonance.”
The left hemisphere is the center of logical, linguistic, linear pro -
cessing. (It may help your explicit memory to notice all the L’s in this
left-sided list.) This sequential set of one representation leading toanother and then another is inherently slower than the rapid, parallelprocessing of the right side. The basic form of conscious representa -
tion in the left hemisphere is the word: Thoughts filled with linguistic
representations fill our consciousness from left-hemisphere activity.What we call “thinking” often refers to the conscious verbal process -184 THE DEVELOPING MIND

ing of the left hemisphere. When we are conscious of sensations and
images, these may be likely to emanate from the right hemisphere.
Of note is that the left hemisphere appears to be inept at reading
nonverbal social or emotional cues from others. Facial recognition
centers are primarily in the right hemisphere. What this suggests isthatright-hemisphere “reality,” its constructed representational world,
will contain the information derived from the emotional states ofothers.
41The right hemisphere’s language is one of nonverbal sensa -
tions and images. In sum, the general impression of the right hemi -
sphere as being “more emotional” is somewhat oversimplified; it is
more accurate to state that the emotional experience in the righthemisphere may be more attuned to the emotional states of others.The right hemisphere’s nonverbal representations involve the essenceof affect, whereas the left hemisphere may have little innate ability toconstruct or be conscious of such a nonverbal, nonlogical view of theworld. However, the left hemisphere is able to mediate social displayrules and can assess complex social situations to some degree.
42Emo-
tional processes are a fundamental part of both hemispheres and arenot restricted to only one side or one area of the brain. Our abilitiesto perceive primary emotional states, and to become both consciousof them and able to translate them into expressions to others, maybe at the heart of the qualitative difference in the experience of emo-tion between the hemispheres.
The whole brain creates the mind. In neurologically intact indi-
viduals, the activity of both sides of the brain contributes to the func-tioning of the brain as a whole with greater or lesser degrees of inter -
dependent activity. Just as we’ve seen that certain mental systems can
function in association (such as explicit and implicit memory), insome conditions there is a dis-association in functioning. The mentalsystems, modules, or modes carrying out the functions of the mindprobably emanate from the activity of the intricate circuitry in spe -
cific regions of the brain.
43Examining the location of these modules
can only help us understand human experience. The studies oflaterality offer a powerful tool in understanding the mind.
ATTACHMENT, LATERALITY,
AND REPRESENTATIONAL PROCESSES
Because emotions are fundamentally linked to appraisal–arousal
mechanisms in both the right and left hemispheres, they influence allRepresentations 185

aspects of cognition, from perception to rational decision making. As
we’ve seen, attachment experiences early in life appear to have directinfluences upon various basic processes, including forms of memory,narrative, emotional regulation, and interpersonal behavior. No for -
mal studies exist at the present time examining how these early emo -
tional relationships may preferentially influence the function and
development of each hemisphere. Given that studies do suggest thatthe left and right hemispheres may experience different aspects ofemotional response, we can ask how intimate affect attunement—theresonance of states of mind between child and caregiver—mightinfluence the two hemispheres in unique ways in the different attach -
ment relationships. The proposal being made here is that the differ -
ent patterns of attachment relationships can be understood in part as
differentially involving communication between one hemisphere ofthe parent and the similar hemisphere of the child. The conceptualbasis for this proposal is that the more mature adult parent’s state ofmind will tend to recruit similar brain processes in the child. If thisoccurs repeatedly and during the crucial early years of development,it is plausible that these shared states may become engrained withinthe child.
What is the evidence that parent–child relationships may involve
asymmetric effects on the developing child’s brain? Studies byGeraldine Dawson and by Tiffany Field and colleagues suggest thatthe left hemisphere’s involvement in positive emotions, such as joyand excitement, make it particularly vulnerable to dysfunction incases of maternal depression.
44In Dawson’s studies of mother–child
dyads with prolonged maternal depression, EEG findings were sug -
gestive of dampened left-hemisphere functioning with relative in -
creases in right-hemisphere activation in both mothers and children.
If a mother’s depression lasted beyond one year, then the child wasmore likely to have prolonged impairment in left-hemisphere activa -
tion in the future. Maternal depression involves decreased affective
attunement and diminished sharing of heightened moments of state-to-state resonance around feelings such as excitement, interest, andjoy.
45The right hemisphere, in this view, is involved in negative emo -
tions, such as fear, sadness, and anger. These findings support the
valence-based view of emotional laterality, in which asymmetrydetermines the hedonic tone of emotional experience.
Other types of studies suggest that the form of parent–child com -
munication during the early years of life may directly shape the
lateralization of brain function. Bavellier, Corina, and Neville haverevealed that the mediation of American Sign Language (ASL), a visual186 THE DEVELOPING MIND

display of signals used to communicate with hearing impaired individ -
uals, is carried out in different areas of the brain depending on when it
was learned.46For example, congenitally deaf individuals who have
learned ASL utilize the left hemispheric regions usually involved in spo -
ken language. Bavellier and colleagues also elected to study normal-
hearing children raised by deaf parents who learned sign language astheir first “language” and to compare them to individuals who learnedASL later in life. In individuals who learned to communicate with ASLearly on, the left hemisphere centers that usually mediate “spoken” lan -
guage subsumed this role for the manually based visual language.
However, in normal-hearing adults who learned ASL after adolescence,the left hemisphere did not subsume this role.
47
These studies suggest that the brain is capable of devoting its
circuitry to alternative sensory modes depending on stimulus input,and that the timing of exposure to stimuli has a direct influenceon how “plastic” the brain is in adapting its circuitry. We can fur-ther propose that the social nature of information processing—theform in which interpersonal communication takes place—may bean important determinant in brain differentiation. This latter possi-bility highlights the notion that whether language is mediated byvisual or by auditory means early in life, similar brain regions willtake on the task of language processing. Could it be that forms of
emotional communication—or the lack of them—that involve non-
verbal aspects of communication can also directly shape braindevelopment in these lateralized ways by experience-dependentdevelopmental processes as well? Future studies will be needed toexplore this possibility.
The right hemisphere is dominant in its activity and development
during the first three years of life.
48Children who experience severe
emotional deprivation during this period may be at most risk of havinglosses in the structural components of their right hemispheres, espe -
cially in the region of the orbitofrontal cortex.
49This vulnerability may
be understood as a function of the primary role of the right hemispherein mediating the affect attunement that serves as a major form of con -
nection and communication between the child and caregiver. This view
also supports the notion that primary emotions, which give rise tovitality affects, may be more closely linked to right-hemisphere func -
tion. When we examine the functional properties of each hemisphere,
especially the right hemisphere, we can begin to appreciate some possi -
ble insights into the differences between individuals with different
attachment experiences.
These issues also raise the point that the timing of experience, beRepresentations 187

it optimal or traumatic, may have the largest impact on those parts
of the brain that are in the most active phase of development. Theseare times of maximal opportunity as well as vulnerability. As RobertThatcher and colleagues have demonstrated, the brain may undergoa cycling of phases throughout childhood, in which one and then theother hemisphere is in an active phase of growth and development.
50
Clinicians and researchers may benefit from awareness of the possi -
bility that the correlation of overwhelming experiences with the nat -
ural oscillations in hemisphere maturation may lead to differing out -
comes for development.
If a child has had little resonance of the activity of his right
hemisphere with that of his caregivers during the first three years oflife, an underdevelopment of that hemisphere’s functioning mayresult. Nonverbal communication, facial expressions, subtleties intone of voice, and emotional attunements will all be minimal in the“experience-dependent maturation” of this child’s right hemisphere.These are the experiential food for the right hemisphere during earlydevelopment, as well as in adult life. A parent’s attachment modelmay directly influence the nature of her emotional attunement, selec-tively reinforcing the activity of certain emotions and disavowing (bynonattunement) other ones.
51
Fonagy and colleagues’ findings that certain attachment dyads
do not foster the development of elements of the “theory-of-mind”module of processing information
52can be extended here to sup-
port the idea that attachment has lateralized effects. We can pro-pose that “reflective function,” in which the mind of one person isable to “mentalize” or create the mind of another, is probably de -
pendent upon processes mediated primarily via the right hemi -
sphere. The reflective function also serves as the substrate for self-
awareness and the ability to process information about the selfand the self with others. Recognizing facial emotional expression,having cognitive representations of others’ minds, having self–otherrelationship representations, and having the capacity to respond tothe mental state of others can all be proposed to be mediated bythe social-emotional processing of the right hemisphere. However,the integration of these modules of processing into a coherentlyfunctioning reflective mode may require a well-developed coordina -
tion of right-hemisphere and left-hemisphere processing, as dis -
cussed below. Attachment studies by Fonagy and his coworkers
support the notion that interpersonal experiences within early care -
giver-child relationships can facilitate, or impair, the development
of such reflective capacity.
53188 THE DEVELOPING MIND

Adults who have insecure states of mind with respect to attach -
ment can be proposed to reveal, within their AAI narratives, frames
of mind in which such integration of the hemispheres has not beenachieved. Such a restricted parental state of mind may impair theparent’s ability to achieve resonance of states with the child. Spe -
cifically, the parent will be unable to foster the activity of each hemi -
sphere and will have difficulty enabling the child to achieve some
form of interhemisphere integration. We can further suggest here thatthe coherent AAI narratives of securely attached adults reveal a coor -
dinated functioning of the “mentalizing” right hemisphere and the
“interpreting” left. We shall see how the integration of right- andleft-hemisphere representational processes and motivational statesleads to a “bilateral form of coherence” and can be revealed withincoherent life narratives. The ways in which the mind may come tointegrate these processes and achieve such coherence will be exploredin greater detail in Chapter 9.
The right hemisphere has a nonverbal “language” of its own,
focusing on the gist, context, or social meaning of experiences. Justas the left hemisphere requires exposure to linguistically based lan-guage in order to grow properly, one can propose that the righthemisphere may require emotional stimulation from the environmentin order to develop properly. Attachment research clearly demon-strates that communication between caregiver and infant shapes theways in which the child’s developing mind learns to process informa-tion. As Aitken and Trevarthen have stated, “Human cognitiondevelopments, and their pathologies, are regulated, from birth, byhighly specific motives in the child’s brain for engaging with motivesin other brains. Emotions constitute an innate system by which func -
tions of attending, purpose, and learning may be coordinated
between subjects.”
54In this manner, emotional communication and
affective attunement become the medium in which the child’s cogni -
tive capacities develop.
As the organization Zero to Three’s logo reads, “To grow a child’s
mind, nurture a baby’s heart.” This view is supported by the writing ofStanley Greenspan, who suggests that early emotional relationshipsform the building blocks for the development of all other representa -
tional processes.
55Aitken and Trevarthen also suggest this view:
Subjective and intersubjective processes are mutually regulating,
and, in early infancy, before manipulative investigation of objectsis under efficient volitional control, the regulations of communica -
tion with a caregiver who offers affectionate, emotionally availableRepresentations 189

company appear to dominate in the discovery and learning of real -
i t y .... There is abundant evidence now that neonatal brains are
embarking on changes in organization that are highly responsiveto stimulation from caregivers. The effects of this experience,while demonstrating the adaptive plasticity of the newborn brain,also give proof of highly elaborate and highly selective systems inthe infant for engaging with the processes that motivate expressivebehaviors in caretaking individuals.
56
In other words, the infant both responds to the world of others and
plays an active role in influencing how others respond. This processcan be seen as a form of “recruitment,” in which neuronal processesselectively activate patterns of firing of other neural pathways—inthis case, within other brains.
Recall that when neuronal circuits become activated, they create
and reinforce their connections with each other. With this in mind, wecan see why an avoidantly attached child’s conscious experience of life,his subjective sense of daily living, may be quite different from that of asecurely attached child whose right hemisphere has been encouraged todevelop. Once established, such a pattern in neuronal activations willtend to recruit similar patterns in the future. Within the avoidantlyattached individual, there may be a disconnection in the integrativefunctioning of the two hemispheres that parallels the emotional discon-nection within the attachment relationship. Studies of avoidant mother–child pairs have shown that words are used without correlation withnonverbal components of communication.
57Such an interactive dis-
connection becomes repeated within a child’s own mind. In this way,one hemisphere may begin to act as an autonomous subsystem of thebrain. At the extreme, one might predict that such a person may feelmore comfortable with abstract ideas and the sharing of intellectualviews about the world than with intense emotional exchanges involv -
ing the sensation of “feeling felt” or the content of others’ minds. Over
time, the relative dominance of one hemisphere over the other and thefunctional isolation of the lateralized modes of processing may begin todominate the subjective experience of life for that individual.
GENETICS, GENDER, AND EXPERIENCE
Before we can accept the proposal being made here that certain attach -
ment experiences preferentially reinforce the development of one hemi -190 THE DEVELOPING MIND

sphere over another and lead to impaired bilateral functioning, we
need to take a more global perspective on what is known about theeffects of innate, nonexperiential factors on the developing individual.Studies have found, for example, that gender plays a large role in deter -
mining hemispheric strengths.
58On the average, females are better than
males in a broad range of skills involving the use of language, such asverbal fluency, articulation speed, and grammar. They are also superiorto men at tasks involving perceptual speed, manual precision and arith -
metic calculations. Males, in contrast, are generally better at tasks that
are spatial in nature, including picture assembly, block design, mentalrotation, maze performance, and mechanical skills. Men are also supe -
rior to women in mathematical reasoning, in intercepting a moving
object, and (believe it or not) in finding their way along a route. As youcan see, these differences demonstrate a trend that may be surprising:Women have more facility in classically left-hemisphere processes, and
men in right-hemisphere ones.
Exposure to hormones during fetal growth is felt to be one fac-
tor that directly influences the specialization of hemispheric function.Studies have found that lateralization probably occurs before birth,reinforcing the notion that innate genetic and other constitutionalfactors (produced by conditions in utero ) may play a large role in the
initial differentiation of the two hemispheres.
59As the newborn
grows, specialization appears to continue for the first few years andis held by some to be complete by the end of the second decade oflife. The role of socialization in hemispheric specialization has notbeen clarified as yet. How the known distinctions in the rearing ofboys versus girls serve to elaborate and reinforce these inborn differ -
ences is an important but unclear issue.
One generally accepted finding is that females tend to have more
processes that are bilaterally distributed. For example, women often
have words represented in both the (usual) left and the right hemi -
sphere. This finding of more integrated functions across the two
sides is supported by anatomic studies demonstrating a number ofdifferences between women and men that support, but do not prove,the notion of increased similarity and accessibility of the left andright hemispheres to each other in women. Cerebral blood flow find -
ings also support the view that men have greater asymmetry in func -
tion than women. One way of summarizing these suggestions is that
women are “less lateralized” than men. For both men and women,however, the left and right hemispheres are anatomically quite dis -
tinct.
60Representations 191

One proposal we can make is that perhaps men and women dif -
fer in the way the dorsal and ventral circuits develop within each
hemisphere. As discussed earlier, Trevarthen has suggested that thedominance of each circuit may act as an “intrinsic motive forma -
tion” that shapes the development of more complex representational
processes.
61Could it be that in men there is a more predominant
development of the dorsal stream in the right hemisphere and theventral stream in the left? Likewise, women may have a more evenlycontributing influence of dorsal and ventral streams on each side ofthe brain, leading to the finding of less lateralization. These possibili -
ties will need to be explored in future research.
Why would the brain be genetically programmed to differentiate
left from right in the first place? Why do we have two hemisphereswith differential functions anyway? There are many speculativeanswers to these questions. One view holds that the functions of onehemisphere can conflict with those of the other. This is called the“cognitive crowding hypothesis” and specifically highlights the ideathat if each hemisphere performed the same function, then the ensu-ing competition would lead to cognitive dysfunction.
62Having two
separate hemispheres with distinct forms of processes allows for thepreservation of the functions of each side. Those organisms thatdeveloped bilateral specialization had increased survival ability andwere able to pass on the trait generation after generation. Asymme-try actually appears to have a long history in many species of ani-mals.
63
And why do women and men differ in their laterality? One
view is that proposed by Jerre Levy, who suggests that the greaterlateralization in men would have been necessary to preserve thehigh level of visuospatial skills necessary for hunting. In women,the role of child rearing would have necessitated more bilateral -
ization of functions such as the use of language for communication
of internal states, as well as social sensitivity and facility with non -
verbal modes of communication.
64This hypothesis combines an
anthropological view of gender roles with cognitive findings on therelationship between sex and asymmetry. It speaks directly to theidea of how generations of humans exposed to evolutionary pres -
sures may have been selected for particular patterns of hemispheric
specialization. It does not focus on how an individual’s experiencewill “pull” for particular functions. Gender differences in cognitionmay change as cultural roles in future generations continue toevolve.192 THE DEVELOPING MIND

HOW DOES EXPERIENCE INFLUENCE
HEMISPHERIC SPECIALIZATION?
There are developmental phases in which primarily one, then the
other, hemisphere grows and expands.65In the first few years of life,
as described earlier, the right hemisphere is both more active andgrowing more rapidly. After these first years, the left hemispherebecomes more dominant in activity and development. By the end ofthe third year of life, the corpus callosum allows for the transfer ofinformation between the two hemispheres. But before this time, onecan almost view the child as a “split-brain” subject, in which theworld of words may often be quite separate from that of intenseemotional reactions. The mind is created from the whole brain with -
in the activity of its disparate circuits and their interactions with each
other. As we’ve seen, the intrinsic motive formation system may existbefore the neocortical capacity to construct representations evenbegins. The developing mind of the child reflects the manner inwhich it is anatomically predisposed to processing information. Afterfour years of age, children usually become much more facile at usingwords to describe their inner states and impulses. Preschools takeadvantage of this developmental capacity in helping children learn tosocialize with their peers by utilizing language to express what theyfeel and want. Such accomplishments require the joint cooperation ofboth hemispheres and may not be possible at an earlier age in mostchildren.
We know from studies of children and adults with neurological
lesions that the brain can adapt to experiential pressures.
66For exam -
ple, in young children with severe forms of epilepsy who have had to
undergo treatment involving removal of an entire hemisphere, theremaining half of the brain appears to be able to take on the func -
tions (such as language) of the now missing hemisphere. In adults
suffering from strokes, however, the brain may not be so “plastic” orable to adapt to loss of specialized functions. Through lengthy reha -
bilitation efforts, however, experience can result in the emergence of
needed old functions within new circuits. The same appears to betrue in cases of congenital impairment of certain sensory modalities,such as sight, in which other modalities (such as touch) utilize theanatomic zones usually specializing in the impaired mode.
67
In professional musicians, the study of music appears to involve
the growth and development of parts of the brain in a different man -
ner from their development in the casual music listener. Specifically,Representations 193

the left brain’s language-based, analytic mode becomes a more domi -
nant part of the music experience with education and formal train -
ing. This appears to involve judgments about duration, sequence,
and rhythm. In contrast, the right side’s ability appears to be stron -
ger in the areas of tonal memory, melody recognition, and intensity.68
The repeated activation of specific neuronal pathways reinforces
the strength of connections between groups of neurons. Thoseneuronal circuits that are not activated do not get reinforced and candie away. Some researchers suggest that there are “windows ofopportunity” during which time activation of specific functions isessential for continued development in that area. If kittens are notexposed to horizontal lines during a certain critical period, for exam -
ple, the visual cortex may lose the ability to process such input later
in life.
69Infants who are not exposed to any spoken language may
lose the ability to acquire normal linguistic functions after the firstfew years.
70Similarly, infants who have no attachment relationships
(for example, who are in orphanages with so few staff members thatattachments do not develop) before the end of the third year of life,at the latest, may have extreme difficulty forming attachments laterin life.
71The motivational system of attachment—its circuits and
potential for development—may have died away and be unavailablefor maturation in the future.
How “plastic” is the brain after the early years of childhood?
For example, if it is true that certain attachment experiences lead tothe underdevelopment of the right-hemisphere processing of nonver-bal aspects of emotional signals, how much can new experiencesalter such a condition in an adult? Research on humans has providedno data as yet to answer this question. Research on other primates,however, suggests that there is far more plasticity in the brain ofadults than was previously believed to be possible.
72These studies
suggest that alterations in input from the environment, such as thoseresulting from amputation of a limb, lead to restructuring of the rep -
resentational processes in certain regions of the brain. Even in an
adult, therefore, the brain appears to be capable to some degree ofresponding to changes in experience with further development ofbrain structure and function.
Another reason for optimism about catalyzing further develop -
ment in adults is that some psychiatric disturbances may be due to
impairments in integrative functioning among widely distributed,sometimes bilateral processes. These impairments may be due to thefailure to develop associative neural pathways linking relatively194 THE DEVELOPING MIND

autonomous modules of processing. However, the creation of new
neural integrative links may be a learning process that remains possi -
ble into adulthood. Addressing the issue of the emergent properties
of neural systems in development, Post and Weiss suggest, “The syn -
aptic networks are in a state of continual rearrangement on both a
micromolecular basis at the level of neurotransmitter and receptorsubtype, as well as on a larger integrative basis for the synthesis ofobjects in the environment, including food and individuals such asself and others.”
73Our brains may retain the ability to continually
reshape, in some fashion, emergent properties that allow us to learnand grow with new experiences.
Informal clinical observations suggest that some individuals do
remain capable of activating the inherent capabilities of the righthemisphere well into adulthood. Learning to integrate these nonver -
bal functions into an active contribution to both internal and inter -
personal experience can be a major challenge, however, especially forthose with avoidant attachment histories. Other individuals seem
much less able, or at least willing, to experience such transforma-tions. One question is how impairments in integrative functioningmay be a result of underdevelopment or an adaptive underutilization.For example, allowing the mind to begin to process the less defin-able, predictable, and controllable information inherent in nonverbalrepresentations can be frightening for some people. At times, havingunilateral dominance may be a defensively adaptive function. In thissituation, attempts to improve bilateral functioning may involveefforts both to catalyze new development and to support the lower -
ing of defensive avoidance tactics.
The blockage of right-hemisphere processes from consciousness
and from engagements in interactions with others may be an adap -
tive “defense” against feeling anxious and out of control. Moving
toward the left hemisphere’s more detail oriented, routinized, top-down processing and its “even-keel” emotional style may be a men -
tal system that is eagerly welcomed if the world is otherwise filled
with uncertainty and excessive overstimulation. Such may be the casefor individuals with certain highly reactive temperamental styles orfor those raised in chaotic homes.
In fact, bilateral asymmetries have been associated with certain
temperamental, affective, and cognitive styles.
74For example, as dis -
cussed in Chapter 4, right-hemisphere dominance has been found in
young infants who later are found to have shy temperaments.75The
behavioral inhibition that accompanies such a constitution can beRepresentations 195

thought of as due to an excessive reactivity of the right hemisphere,
which has been proposed to mediate withdrawal behavior. In theface of novelty, such activation may lead to a turning inward andavoidance of engaging in the world. Recall that the dorsal cortico -
limbic pathway is dominant in the right hemisphere, and that this
pathway is involved in the orienting to novel stimuli, the activationof internal self-regulatory mechanisms, the representation of the selfand the body, and the “feedforward” representation of the future.
76
As we put these elements together here, we can propose that an indi -
vidual with an overly active dorsal pathway/right hemisphere early in
life may experience not only increased attention and reactivity tonovel situations, but also representations of the self in distress, whichmay create further caution and withdrawal. As such a child matures,the active representation of the future within the dorsal stream mayextend such a cautious stance as the mind attempts to anticipate theworld of uncertainty by matching actual experiences with well-elabo-rated expectations. Such an attempt to anticipate the world can beseen in the behavior of the slow-to-warm up, shy child clinging to aparent’s side at a friend’s birthday party. What has begun as an initialoverdominance of right-hemisphere functioning may now have blos-somed into a significantly impairing behavioral inhibition. Interac-tions with parents and other caregivers during the early years of sucha constitutionally shy child’s development can help ameliorate such atrajectory. As discussed earlier, Kagan has demonstrated that interac-tions supporting a shy child’s emotional experience but nurturingattempts to “push the envelope” into tolerable levels of uncertaintyand exploration may be the most helpful in enabling the child togrow and develop.
77
WAYS OF KNOWING
What are the implications of asymmetry for our experiential ways ofknowing about reality? One view is that with the advent of language,the brain has to preserve a way to continue to process things quicklyand more directly in relation to the body and the external world.This becomes the continued work of the right hemisphere. The left,in contrast, has fewer inputs from the body and is able to use theabstract manipulations of linguistic representations to allow us toexperience a “higher-order consciousness”: Linguistically, we are ableto reflect on the past and the present, and to anticipate and plan for196 THE DEVELOPING MIND

the future. Such abilities also allow us to create new combinations of
things, in our minds and in the world. We can build buildings, flyairplanes, and write books of poetry (or books about the brain). Thelogical, linear, detail-focused, linguistic left brain is crucial for humancreativity as well as technology. It is essential for getting the messageinto shareable packets of socially transmissible information. What isthe right brain for?
The right brain appears to be able to perceive patterns within a
holistic framework, noting spatial arrangements that the left isunable to sense. The right brain is able to create the gist or contextof experiences and the overall meaning of events. The nonverbal“language” of the right hemisphere is based on sensations andimages. These rapidly associated images give us a more direct andimmediate representation of the world and of ourselves. This gives usa perceptual advantage: We can perceive the world for “how it is”from a bottom-up perspective. The left hemisphere, in contrast, isable to categorize perceptions based on prior experience from a top-down view. In their essential features, Levy argues, the spatial abili-ties of the right hemisphere are directly conflictual with the linguisticrepresentations of the left.
78According to this “cognitive crowding
hypothesis,” keeping the right mode separate from the left allows for
the existence of two extremely different but vital and important waysof knowing. In this manner, the isolation of the two hemispheres is
required in order to achieve the unique information-processingmodes of each side of the brain.
Memory processes are also specialized in each hemisphere.
79The
memory researcher Daniel Schacter notes,
Neurologists and neuropsychologists have known for over a cen -
tury that language and verbal abilities are heavily dependent on
the left hemisphere, whereas nonverbal and spatial functions aremore dependent on the right hemisphere. Memory is similarlylateralized. Patients with damage to the left hippocampus andmedial temporal lobe tend to have difficulties explicitly remember -
ing verbal information but have no problems remembering visual
designs and spatial locations. Patients with damage to the righthippocampus and medial temporal lobe tend to show the oppositepattern.
80
Goldberg and Costa extend this argument by suggesting that the
functional and anatomic studies of specialization support the viewRepresentations 197

that the right hemisphere is better equipped to deal with interre -
gional integration.81That is, the right hemisphere has more associa -
tional links, integrating information within the right brain in a “hori -
zontal fashion” across modalities and attaining a contextual pattern
of the world. The right hemisphere has a greater capacity for dealingwith context and informational complexity and for integrating acrossvarious modes of representations (such as sight, sound, and touch)within a single effort or task. Some consider that the right hemi -
sphere is in this way better equipped to perform parallel processing.
The left hemisphere, in contrast, is built for “vertical integra -
tion,” with intraregional linkages allowing for detailed assessment
of a single mode of representation. For example, when a percep -
tual representation matches a linguistic category, it allows the left
hemisphere to move deeply into routinized responses in its top-down processing. These linear relationships are well establishedand link specific inputs with particular outputs. The left hemi-sphere is therefore said to be built for a categorical response toroutine stimuli. In other words, the left hemisphere’s experience ofreality is literally created by the more rigidly established definitionsof its linguistic packets of representations: words. The right hemi-sphere, in contrast, is designed for newly assembled responses tonovel stimuli. This asymmetry of the brain creates a functionalcontrast between familiarity on the left and novelty on the right.
A practical and intriguing example of experiencing the difference
in these two modes of seeing reality is provided by Betty Edwards’sbook Drawing on the Right Side of the Brain.
82In this practical
workbook, the educator/author introduces the reader to the notionof cerebral lateralization and provides exercises in which the differ -
ences between the two ways of knowing can be personally experi -
enced. Essentially, when the left brain is told to “be quiet” and is not
allowed to categorize what it sees, the right brain is able to assert itsbottom-up mode of constructing visual reality. The results can bestaggering; for instance, those who have forgotten since childhoodhow to draw may be happily shocked at how active their right hemi -
spheres can still be. As Edwards’s book demonstrates, many individ -
uals have found a way to live primarily in a left-hemisphere mode of
top-down categorizations with routinized perceptions and behaviors.The timeless and direct quality of experience that the book facili -
tates—the right hemisphere’s mode of knowing the world—can make
the reader feel quite alive.
Such an experience often leaves the individual with a clear view
of how distinct these two ways of knowing are. Though supported198 THE DEVELOPING MIND

by a wealth of research data on laterality, the issue of “left brain or
right brain” is not even really important in the final analysis. Whatwe are concerned with is the subjective experience of minds, notmerely the functional anatomy of the brain. It is indisputable thatthere are two profoundly different modes in which the mind pro -
cesses information. One or the other mode can dominate our con -
scious experience at various times. The finding that these modes of
the mind do indeed have robust correlations with the sides of thebrain just helps us to understand the probable neurophysiologicalmechanisms underlying what has been known for hundreds ofyears.
83
Neuroscience can also help us avoid excessive generalizations
about bilaterality. Our different ways of knowing intermingle in ourdaily lives. Creativity does not come from only one mode or theother. Happiness or other emotions do not emerge from living onlyin the timeless, nonverbal mode of constructing reality. Success doesnot emerge solely from the linguistic, controlled, and well-definedrules of the other mode. What research findings can be synthesizedto suggest and what we can propose, in fact, is that an emergentquality of living a vital and flexible life may come from an opennessto bilateral functioning involving many ways of knowing.
THE DEVELOPMENT OF MINDSIGHT:
MINDS CREATING MINDS
One of the basic forms of information that the mind constructs and
processes is that of the sense of mind itself. The “mind-creating”module of the mind appears to be a function of the right hemisphereand develops early in life.
84Children during the first years of life are
able to detect the difference between animate and inanimate objectsand to attribute qualities of mind, such as intentions, attentions, andfeelings, to the former ones. By their third year, they are able toengage in symbolic play, in which they can invest inanimate objectswith animate qualities of intentionality and emotional response.
85
This immersion in pretend play involves the creation of social inter -
actions and stories that involve the subjective, mental lives of the
interacting characters. As Fonagy and Target have noted,
The child’s development and perception of mental states in himself
and others thus depends on his observation of the mental world ofhis caregiver. He is able to perceive mental states, to the extentRepresentations 199

that his caregiver’s behavior implied such states. This he does
when the caregiver is in a shared pretend mode of playing with thechild (hence the association between pretend and early mental -
ization), and many ordinary interactions (such as physical care and
comforting, conversation with peers) will also involve such sharedmentation. This is what makes mental state concepts such asthinking inherently intersubjective; shared experience is part of thevery logic of mental state concepts .... W e believe that most
important for the development of mentalizing self-organization isthat exploration of the mental state of the sensitive caregiverenables the child to find in his mind an image of himself as moti -
vated by beliefs, feelings, and intentions, in other words, as
mentalizing.
86
The initial sharing of mental experiences therefore lays the
groundwork for the rest of mental development, including the acqui -
sition of complex cognitive abilities. How does this occur? As with
other aspects of mental functioning, looking toward informationprocessing helps us to understand the “mentalizing” module of themind.
The normal child’s brain is able to take in information about the
subjective mental state of another person. These signals are those ofthe nonverbal realm, which we’ve discussed: eye contact, facialexpression, tone of voice. An important aspect of communicationinvolves “joint referencing” signals (such as looking at a third objector pointing), which contain the information that the sender is focus-ing her attention in a certain direction or on a particular object. Dur -
ing the first year of life, joint referencing becomes a shared form of
communication. It is during this phase that the child begins to sensethe intention of another person; this permits jokes, such as pretend -
ing to jump in a sink or to eat a book, to be understood and
enjoyed. During this phase of life and onward, the mind has the abil -
ity to detect that another person has a mind with a focus of atten -
tion, an intention, and an emotional state. To put it simply, the child
has a concept of others’ minds. This is also referred to as the child’s“theory of mind.” As we’ve discussed earlier, the theory-of-mindmodule is a component of the larger capacity of “reflective” func -
tioning hypothesized to be an essential parental feature of secure
attachments.
In the pervasive developmental disorder of autism, one sees the
dysfunction in this mind-creating mental module of the mind.
87
Simon Baron-Cohen has used the term “mindblindness” to refer to200 THE DEVELOPING MIND

this inability to see others’ minds.88We have used the opposite term,
“mindsight,” to refer to this innate capacity for perceiving the mindsof others. Baron-Cohen discusses the central role of the rightorbitofrontal cortex in mediating this fundamental process, which isconstitutionally abnormal in children with autism.
We can also use the information-processing framework to sug -
gest what mindsight means for the mind. We can create representa -
tions within our own minds of the elements of others’ subjective
experiences: their intentions, emotions, focus of attention, beliefs,attitudes, thoughts, perceptions, and memories. Of course, theseattributes exist in other persons without our creating them. But in amind that does not have the capacity to process the signals fromanother person, or to create the mental representations of another’smind, there is literally an absence of such a reality. In this case, themind of the other does not exist. Within the perceiver’s mind, theother’s mind has not been created by the necessary representationalmachinery of the mind itself. It may also be that the perceiver lacksthe ability to reflect upon her own mind because of this impairmentin the ability to form representations of minds.
How can a mind not be able to conceptualize a mind? If we
view the mind as a processor of information, the answer is straight-forward. Without the representations of mind within the neural sym-bols of the mind, there exists no information about the mind withinthe mind. Others’ subjective experiences, their minds, do not exist.
In most individuals without autism, the mind-creating or
mindsight module is presumably neurologically intact. We wouldbe advised to remember that mindblindness, though, is not likebeing pregnant: There appear to be mild degrees of impairment inmindsight that may have neurologically constitutional underpin -
nings.
Can impairments to mindsight be created by experience? Fonagy
and Target suggest that the answer is yes: Specific forms of insecureattachment in which the parent does not focus on the mental statesof the child and in which parental states are intrusive or disorganiz -
ing can lead to an impairment in the acquisition of theory of mind.
89
How are such impairments to mindsight mediated? Are the dulled
mindsight abilities of a dismissing adult a form of such impairment?Are they established by their lack of activation during childhood? Dosuch develop mental impediments respond to future interventions?
These are questions that researchers of the future may attempt to
answer.Representations 201

ADAPTIVE IMPAIRMENT OF MINDSIGHT
Psychosocial context can permit the activation or deactivation of
reflective function.90To mediate this context-specific use of the reflec -
tive, mentalizing function, we can propose here that the mind may be
capable of dis-associating component modules by impairing the inte -
grative function of essential associative neural pathways. Relation -
ship histories can impair the development of the integrative reflective
function. This impairment can be pervasive and can lead to a child’sgeneralized inability to mentalize, as revealed in impaired symbolicplay and joint referencing.
We can also suggest that an impairment to mindsight may be
state-dependent. That is, under specific conditions, a child (or adult)may be able to disengage the components essential for reflectivefunction, shutting down this important capacity. How does the mindachieve this? In this instance, we can propose that blockage of thecorpus callosal fibers interconnecting the two hemispheres, and ofinterconnections within the right hemisphere itself, may be a mecha-nism that allows mindsight to be impaired as an adaptation to certainoverwhelming situations. Developmentally, this may be the situation
in avoidant or disorganized attachment, in which communicationsare emotionally empty or terrorizing, respectively. In either of thesesituations, a child adapts to a particular relationship context with theinhibition of reflective function.
This finding may help explain why some individuals, such as
those who commit war crimes or genocide, are capable of empathicrelationships with their family and friends but can enter cold, discon -
nected states when involved in crimes against individuals or human -
ity. This ability to dis-associate thinking and behavior from the cre -
ation of the subjective mental experiences of others within our own
minds may help us to understand various aspects of antisocial behav -
ior. The fact that such state-dependent impairment or more pervasive
lack of development of mindsight exists is too often revealed in theincreasingly violent society in which we live.
This impairment in reflective function in the setting of limited
but functioning logical language-based thinking reveals how the sep -
aration of the hemispheres can allow for the dis-association of nor -
mally associated modes of processing information. As an example,
let me offer one possible explanation for the phenomenon of intellec -
tualization seen within some members of the medical profession,
especially during training, as an illustration of an adaptation to202 THE DEVELOPING MIND

stressful conditions. This example helps explain how under certain
conditions it may be prudent to develop at least partial impairmentof one’s mindsight abilities. Working for the first time with acutely illpatients in a medical setting may call for a medical student to use anonmentalizing mode of processing—an adaptive inhibition ofempathic, interpersonally connecting processing. This allows the stu -
dent access to the linear, logical sequences of factual knowledge and
the ability to focus on the details of patient care, while avoiding themulitlayered emotional meaning of a patient’s illness. At the oversim -
plified level, this could be explained by a shutting down of the right
hemisphere’s capacity to reflect on mental experience, while at thesame time maintaining the syllogistic reasoning of the left hemi -
sphere’s mode of cognition.
If the medical student can’t reintegrate the information-processing
modules of her right hemisphere after a work day, or after a week,month, or year, then we can predict that certain features may thenbecome missing from her life. These adaptations can be seen as afunction of the student’s present hemispheric adaptations, but theymay be shaped in part by the patterns from an earlier attachmenthistory. That is, these learned adaptations may result in part frompatterns of disconnection that may have been established and madereadily accessible by prior experience. For the student, the presentdisconnection may lead to a loss of readily accessible autobiographi-cal memory and of intense primary emotional states whose apprais-als create a sense of meaning in life. Personal relationships maybecome strained as communication becomes dominated by context-in -
dependent details and logical, linguistically based talk, rather than
also including emotional messages between two relatives or friends.For this medical student, or for others engaged in emotionally chal -
lenging work, shutting down the right hemisphere temporarily may
be a needed adaptation in order to perform a job efficiently. Livingin an isolated, left-hemisphere-dominated internal world, however,can be experienced as filled with highly categorized routines or top-down processes that lack a feeling of spontaneity and vitality. If theright hemisphere does not become integrated with the left later on,then such adaptations may prove to be dysfunctional and lead toserious problems outside, or even inside, the workplace. The medicalstudent, and others learning to cope with overwhelming experiences,may be aided by understanding this adaptive dis-association of inte -
grative processes.
In this example, the adaptive need under stress to diminish (atRepresentations 203

least conscious) access to the representations of others’ minds may
lead to the isolated restriction of the mindsight module of the righthemisphere. As with any form of dis-association, anatomically dis -
persed processes can become functionally isolated if the integrating
neural pathways making associations become blocked. Such a pro -
cess may occur either at the level of the interhemispheric transfer of
information or in the form of dis-associations within the informationprocessing of one hemisphere—in this case, that of the right. As withother forms of dis-association, blockage of certain modes may alsoinvolve the impairment of related functions. In this example, theorbitofrontal cortex is the primary site for integrating a wide rangeof fundamental processes, including mindsight, stimulus appraisal,somatic representation, autonomic activity, affect regulation, andautonoetic consciousness. The adaptive blockage of mindsight repre -
sentations may tend to be associated with the unintentional impair -
ment of a number of these anatomically and functionally relatedorbitofrontally mediated processes.
Just as the mind can isolate implicit recollections from explicit
ones, so too can it isolate right- from left-hemisphere functions. Hemi-spheric dis-association can be understood as a domination of one modeover the other. The monosemantic, linguistic left hemisphere—filledwith modes of information processing that rely upon the rules of logicand reason, and able to negotiate in an external world of symbols andlanguage—can often find its active place in interacting with the outsideworld. The left hemisphere’s experience of consciousness may be betterequipped to deal with the world in abstract concepts independent ofemotional context. The right hemisphere, in contrast, is filled withpolysemantic images of the world, perceptions of others’ emotions,sensations of the body, and holistic patterns of intuitive insights thatoften defy words. These mental representations are context-dependent,filled with horizontal, multilayered associations to a wide array ofbodily sensations, sense of self and other, autobiographical memories,and emotional meaning. There is often no easy way for the right hemi -
sphere to “speak,” especially if only the left hemisphere of oneself or
another is listening.
REFLECTIONS: REPRESENTING REALITY
AND PSYCHOLOGICAL WELL-BEING
The mind constructs its own experience of reality. Emanating from
the interface of the brain and human relationships, the mind creates204 THE DEVELOPING MIND

connections among the various elements of representations, ranging
from sensations and images to concepts and words. The connectionsamong the layers of neural activity weave a fabric of subjective life:They enable us to feel, behave, think, plan, and communicate.
Living in a world constructed by our own minds makes knowing
about these representational processes essential in deepening ourunderstanding of human experience. Patterns of representations dif -
fer markedly between the left and right halves of the brain. An
important distinction, often underrecognized within the fields of clin -
ical psychiatry and psychology, is the distinction between the modes
of representation within the two hemispheres of the brain. The lefthemisphere has been described as having a logical “interpreter” func -
tion that uses syllogistic reasoning to deduce cause–effect relation -
ships from the representational data it has available to it. The right
hemisphere specializes in the representation of context and ofmentalizing capacities. It is therefore uniquely capable of registeringand expressing affective facial expressions, developing a “theory ofmind,” registering and regulating the state of the body, and havingautobiographical representations.
How are these bilateral processes relevant to relationships?
Communication is crucial in establishing neural connections early inlife and involves the sharing of energy and information. Levels ofarousal (energy) and mental representations (information) are verydifferent on each side of the brain. The sharing of arousal and repre-sentations from one brain to another—the essence of connectingminds—will thus differ between the hemispheres. One can propose,in fact, that the right brain perceives the output of the right brain ofanother person, whereas the left brain perceives the left brain’s out -
put. In intimate, emotional relationships, such as friendship, ro -
mance, parent–child pairs, psychotherapy, and teacher–student dyads,
what does this look like? The left brain sends out language-based,logical, sequential interpreting statements that attempt to make senseof things. The left brain receives these messages, decodes the linguis -
tic representations, and tries to make sense out of these newly
arrived digital symbols. At the same time, the right brain is sendingnonverbal messages via facial expressions, gestures, prosody, andtone of voice, which are perceived by the other’s right brain. OK. Sowhat?
The “what” of it is that the right brain takes this information
and uses its social perceptions of nonverbal communication toengage directly in a few very important processes. It creates an imageof the other’s mind (“mindsight”). It regulates bodily response whileRepresentations 205

at the same time registering the somatic markers of shifts in bodily
state. It creates autobiographical representations within memory. Itappraises the meaning of these events and directly affects the degreeof arousal, thus creating primary emotional responses. Intense andprimary emotional states are therefore likely to be mediated via theright hemisphere.
When we examine these findings alongside the independent set
of data from attachment research, certain patterns are suggested. Theearly affect attunement and alignment of mental states can be seen asa mutually regulated hemisphere-to-hemisphere coordination be -
tween child and parent. In this view, we can propose that avoidant
attachment involves a serious lack of this form of communicationbetween the right hemispheres of child and parent. The extension ofthis finding to laterality research raises the possibility that the lefthemisphere serves as the dominant mediator of communicationbetween an avoidant child and a dismissing parent. In support of thisperspective, it turns out that in 1989, Main and Hesse examinedexactly this hypothesis in two large-scale samples of Berkeley under-graduates, each of whom were asked about their degree of right (orleft) handedness, as a rough approximation of brain dominance.
91At
the same time, Main and Hesse had devised a set of self-report itemsthat they considered indicative of a “dismissing” state of mind.Although this type of scale was not ultimately able to predict AAIclassifications statistically,
92and therefore these findings were never
published, in keeping with the hypothesis both studies found that thedegree of right handedness was significantly correlated with elevatedscores of the scale for “dismissing” state of mind.
Further extensions of these ideas to relationships allow us to
look more deeply into why certain couples may be “unable to com -
municate” with any emotional satisfaction. When we know about
the different languages of the right and left hemispheres, it is possibleto make hypotheses about why interactions may be frustrating: Indi -
viduals may not know how to understand the particular language
being expressed by their significant others. If we then integrate pastattachment history in understanding the pattern of these difficulties,it is possible to create a framework of understanding that can helpthe partners in such relationships escape their well-worn ruts.
If this laterality–attachment hypothesis is correct, then a logical
implication would be that any experiences that help to develop theprocessing abilities of each hemisphere and/or the integrated activi -
ties of the two hemispheres may improve certain individuals’ internal206 THE DEVELOPING MIND

and interpersonal lives. Such movement toward more coordinated
interhemispheric functioning would be quite welcomed by many peo -
ple (especially by the lonely and frustrated spouses of dismissing
individuals). The developmental and experiential histories that haveled to a lack of integration of the functioning of the two hemispheresmay leave individuals vulnerable to emotional and social problems.Unresolved trauma and grief, histories of emotional neglect, andrestrictive adaptations may each represent some form of constrictionin the flow of information processing between the hemispheres. Thisproposal of the central role of dis-associated hemispheric processingin emotional disturbances is supported by the finding that insecureattachments in childhood may establish a vulnerability to psychologi -
cal dysfunction.
Emotional relationships that enhance the development of each
hemisphere and its unrestricted integration with the activity of theother can thus be proposed to be likely to foster the development ofpsychological well-being. In this way, a secure attachment can beseen as a developmental relationship that provides for an integrationof functioning of the two hemispheres, both between child and care-giver and within the child’s own brain. At the most basic level, right-hemisphere-to-right-hemisphere communication can be seen withinthe affectively attuned communications that allow for primary emo-tional states to be shared via nonverbal signals. Left-hemisphere-to-left-hemisphere alignment can be seen in shared attention to objectsin the world. Reflective dialogues, in which language is used to focusattention on the mental states of others (including the two membersof the dyad), may foster bilateral integration between the two hemi -
spheres of both child and parent. The resilience of secure attach -
ments can thus be proposed as founded in part in the bilateral inte -
gration that these relationships foster.Representations 207

THE DEVELOPING MINDStates of Mind
CHAPTER 6
/fl2rt
States of Mind
Cohesion, Subjective Experience,
and Complex Systems
DEFINING STATES OF MIND
States of Mind and Activity of the Brain
How does the mind coordinate its many modules of information
processing in order to construct reality in the moment? How can webegin to understand how the billions of neurons with trillions ofinterconnections within the brain become activated in organized pat -
terns that create the mind? How is the flow of energy within the
widely distributed activations of neurons regulated? An answer toeach of these questions is in the idea of a “state of mind.” States of
mind allow the brain to achieve cohesion in functioning.
A “state of mind” can be defined as the total pattern of activa -
tions in the brain at a particular moment in time. Patterns of activa -
tion reveal the neural net profiles within the various circuits that
mediate the mental modules of information processing. These circuitsare distributed in a widely interconnected web, with profoundlycomplex inputs and outputs linking various clusters of cells thatcarry out particular functions.
1At a very basic level, for example, we
can suggest that a fearful state of mind is the clustering of relatedprocesses in a cohesive whole. A state of heightened caution, focalattention, behavioral hypervigilance, memories of past experiences ofthreat, models of the self as a victim in need of protection, and emo -
208

tional arousal alerting the body and mind to prepare for harm are all
processes that become functionally primed or readied for activity. Astate of mind therefore involves a clustering of functionally synergis -
tic processes that allow the mind as a whole to form a cohesive state
of activity. The benefit of cohesion is to maximize the efficiency andefficacy of the processes needed in a given moment in time. Cohesivestates of mind are highly functional and adaptive to the environment.
As we’ve seen in Chapter 5, one of the most basic processes of
the mind is the representation of information. As neural symbols,representations both contain information and make further process -
ing events happen. In this way these dynamic representations cause
further neural excitation, which itself carries information.
2The links
among such a changing, distributed system of processes are over -
whelmingly complex. To understand the notion of these complex
processes—of states of mind—we must look at some ideas abouthow systems function.
States, Traits, and Cohesion
How can we conceptualize the systems that make up the mind, andthe mind itself as a complex system? One framework can be derivedfrom the mind’s central function as an information processor. Mentalactivity stems from basic processing modules. A “module” can bedefined as a set of neural circuits carrying a certain type of informa-tion and utilizing a similar form of mental signal or code. For exam-ple, a module for processing visual input involves the signals sentfrom the eyes to the visual cortex. This sensory module may includecircuits that detect certain shapes, contrasts, or angles. Another typeof module, a visual perception module, may consist of circuits thatcluster these sensory representations into perceptual patterns (such as“form of furniture” or “face”). Taken together, these and similarmodules process visual data as a collection of circuits with represen -
tational processes, forming the visual “mode.” If the information is
then coordinated with other perceptual modalities (modes), then wehave the perceptual “system.” Examples of other systems of themind include the various forms of implicit and explicit memory.Within explicit memory, there is a system composed of the modes ofautobiographical versus semantic memory. Within the autobiographi -
cal mode are the modules encoding specific episodes, gists, and
generic autobiographical knowledge. For example, when we asksomeone to tell us what he remembers about last year, he will acti -States of Mind 209

vate his explicit memory system’s subcomponent mode of autobio -
graphical memory and its basic modules. As we’ve discussed, these
components have specific neural circuitry involved in the encodingand retrieval functions of autonoetic consciousness.
So we are using a vocabulary of modules, modes, and systems to
describe one way in which the system of the mind can be conceptual -
ized. What is the point? The point is that the activities of the brain,
these layers of increasingly complex information processing, becomeorganized in a patterned fashion. We experience these patterns of activ -
ity as states of mind. We will see that a state of mind does two funda -
mental things: It coordinates activity in the moment, and it creates a
pattern of brain activation that can become more likely in the future.That is, a state of mind can become a remembered brain activity config -
uration or neural net profile. Repeated activation of particular states—
for example, a shame state or a state of despair—can become muchmore likely to be activated in the future. In this manner, states canbecome traits of the individual that influence both internal and inter-personal processes.
3
A state of mind clusters the activity of specific systems of pro-
cessing. The degree to which this clustering is effective and usefuldetermines the state’s cohesiveness. What coordinates such a cluster-ing process? We can propose here that part of the answer is emotion.The regulation of emotion directs the flow of energy through thechanging states of activation of the brain. Recall from Chapter 4 thatthere are convergence zones in the brain, such as the orbitofrontalcortex, thought to be responsible for the coordination of the activityof widely distributed systems: bodily state, arousal–appraisal centers,attention via the lateral prefrontal cortex, perception from the sen -
sory cortices, abstract representations within the associational neo -
cortex, memory processes via the medial temporal lobe, and motor
responses via the basal ganglia.
4The activation (energy) of these cir -
cuits determines their contribution to the overall state of the brain at
a given point in time. When activated, these circuits create and pro -
cess representations (information) within their specialized computa -
tional modes. The regulation of emotion is mediated by the limbic
region of the brain, with its structural interconnections and func -
tional capacity to coordinate a wide range of brain activity.
What does “to coordinate a wide range of brain activity” actu -
ally mean? Literally, this means that the various systems that make
up the brain, from “lower” or “simpler” ones (such as the registra -
tion and regulation of the autonomic nervous system’s control of210 THE DEVELOPING MIND

bodily states) to the “higher,” more complex ones (such as the
neocortical conceptual representations of thought), can be function -
ally linked and temporally associated with each other in a given state
of mind. In this context, “linked” means that the systems are simul -
taneously activated and have functional influences upon each other.
This is a state of mind.
Each moment brings a combination of activations creating a
unique state of mind. However, repeated patterns of activation maybecome “engrained,” meaning that they are made more likely to bereactivated in the future (as noted above). Particular states of mindmay develop cohesion through their repeated activation, as well asthrough the functional benefits of their internal linkages.
At times, the mind cannot organize itself effectively in response
to experiences. Such experiences are traumatizing, in that they over -
whelm the mind’s ability to adapt.
5As we’ve discussed in the case of
disorganized attachment, some interpersonal experiences result in themind’s becoming unable to form a cohesive and adaptive state. Inthis situation, the mind enters a chaotic, disorganizing state of activa-tions lacking in cohesion. The noncohesive characteristic of such astate may itself actually become a trait of the individual. Disorgani-zation or disorientation becomes a repeated pattern of activation orstate of mind. This may explain the acquisition of dissociation as anadaptation to stress seen in those with histories of disorganizedattachments.
Organizing States of Mind
A state of mind can be proposed to be a pattern of activation ofrecruited systems within the brain responsible for (1) perceptual bias,(2) emotional tone and regulation, (3) memory processes, (4) mentalmodels, and (5) behavioral response patterns. A state of mind can
have enduring clusters of activation of each of these basic elements.One can discover the elements of an individual’s state of mind byfocusing on the elements of her perceptions, feelings, thoughts, mem -
ories, attitudes, beliefs, and desires—and how these may be influenc -
ing her behavior and interactions with others. Also, because states of
mind are dynamic processes, trying to understand them also requiresthat we look at the changes in the individual’s mental processes overtime.
For example, if an individual has been exposed to repeated
neglect as a young child, a state of despair may have been activatedStates of Mind 211

and engrained. In this excessively low energy state, perceptions of the
world are marked by a sense of rejection; emotions are filled withshame and hopelessness; memories may evoke previous experiencesof being rejected; a model of the self as unlovable and of others asunavailable may be activated; and there may be a behavioral ten -
dency to withdraw. Because this state of despair has been repeatedly
activated, it will be more likely to be activated in response to evenminor signs of rejection, such as a friend’s or therapist’s not returninga phone call on time. The change in state in response to this environ -
mental context is a function, in part, of this individual’s history. The
entire cluster, however, can quickly become the dominant informa -
tion-processing mode at such a moment, giving the individual a sense
of massive rejection and despair far exceeding the initial stimulus andnot having any clear, consciously accessible connection to experi -
ences from the past.
Our subjective lives emerge from mental states that are exqui-
sitely sensitive to social interaction. Recall that as open, dynamic sys-tems, we are composed of lower levels of subcomponents as well asbeing ourselves subcomponents of the larger systems of social con-nections in which we live. Our brains have circuits specificallydesigned to receive and send social signals. Our minds are thus ableto process this information and utilize it so that we can be activeparticipants in social communication. In the example above of adespair state, this individual’s prior history has engrained a tendencyto be excessively sensitive and responsive to social signals containinginformation about another’s lack of interest. In simpler terms, theperson can easily feel rejected. When not in such a state of mind, theindividual may function perfectly well. However, the regulation ofher state of mind—her modulation of emotion—is such that she canquickly (and maladaptively) enter a paralyzing state of despair, whichinfluences the rest of her mind’s information processing in the direc -
tion of reinforcing that state. She perceives, feels, remembers, con -
ceives, thinks, and behaves in ways that even more deeply engrain
the state of mind at that time. Such are the organizing and self-rein -
forcing effects of a state of mind.
In this chapter we’ll explore some ways of thinking about the
organization of complex systems to understand how the brain cancreate a state of mind. We’ll also look into the idea of how the stateof mind of one person can influence the organization of the state ofmind of another. First, let’s look at an example of how the state ofmind can change rapidly in response to environmental cues.212 THE DEVELOPING MIND

Context Sensitivity
If a man is walking with his romantic partner on a beach, enjoying
the breeze and the sound of the waves, he will be in a certain state ofmind that may be characterized by an attentional focus on the waterand sky and on his lover’s hand in his own; an awareness of a deepsense of calm and connection; easy access to other similar romanticmoments; a mental model of life as simple and rewarding; and abehavioral set of gentle, easy responses to others as he strolls downthe sand. He may have a model of himself as a lovable persondeserving of such a tranquil and connecting experience.
If someone suddenly grabs this man’s shoulder and roughly says,
“Hey, give me your money!”, his state of mind is likely to be sud -
denly transformed. This encounter with the environment will create a
new context. The state of his mind is extremely sensitive to externalconditions. This change in the environment creates a shift in hisbrain. He perceives the sound of the intruder’s tone of voice, the con-tent of his message, and the bodily contact. All of his sensory processing systems, including auditory, visual, and somatosensory (bodilysensations), take in the data. At an early, “lower” level—before com-plex processing and long before conscious awareness—his alarm/defense system, including the amygdala, fires an internal signal of“Danger!” This subcortical processing takes rapid effect in shiftinghis state of mind. This shift in state leads him to have a perceptualbias to interpret stimuli in the environment as threatening. A behav-ioral response pattern of fight or flight will become activated, withhis heart beginning to race and muscles tightening. These sensationsmay feed back to his emotional processing centers, especially theorbitofrontal cortex, and let his mind know that he is feeling scaredand/or angry. His attentional mechanisms may be mostly focused onthe intruder’s actions, but he may also become aware of his bodilyresponse and altered mental state within working memory, which (aswe’ve discussed) has been proposed as a possible mechanism for con -
scious experience. Memories, explicit and implicit, of other moments
of danger and fear may become more readily accessible via the mech -
anism of state-dependent retrieval. This is useful in accessing knowl -
edge of what he did and skills he exercised in similar past situations.
A mental model that the world is a dangerous place may nowbecome active. A model of the self may include anything from “I canprotect myself” to “I knew this would happen to me; I am such avulnerable and helpless person.”States of Mind 213

Often the shift between states of mind is not so dramatic as in
this example. Context changes can be quite subtle; they may beinduced, for example, by alterations in a companion’s tone of voiceor facial expression. Our minds are continually responding to exter -
nal cues, especially from the social environment.
An example of a more common situation is that in which state
shifts occur during an adult’s visit “back home” for the holidays.Returning to the physical and social environment of one’s youth canprovide context cues that activate old states of mind. A person mayfind herself, unwillingly and initially unknowingly, suddenly feeling“like a child” again. Sensations of dependence, inadequacy, or angermay dominate her emotional experience. She may begin acting inways as if she were a teenager again, taking part in minor (or major)battles with parents with whom she hasn’t lived for years. As thisperson watches herself taking part in these old behavioral patterns,she may notice that her parents are also acting as if she is their rene-gade adolescent again! Which came first, their treatment of her orhers of them? How does this process occur? To understand states ofmind and the rapid and intricate ways they are influenced by ourpresent experiences and past encounters, we need to turn now to thestudy of complex systems.
COMPLEX SYSTEMS
Complexity, Natural Selection, and Connectionism
A state of mind allows disparate activities of the brain to become
cohesive in a given moment in time. A single brain functions as anelaborate system that can be understood by examining the “theory ofnonlinear dynamics of complex systems” or, more briefly, “complex -
ity theory.”
6This perspective has been applied to a range of inani -
mate and living systems in an attempt to understand the often unpre -
dictable but self-organizing nature of complex clusters of entities
functioning as a system. The human brain has recently been exam -
ined by a number of theoreticians as one such nonlinear dynamic
system, also called a dynamical system. Though a detailed review isbeyond the scope of this chapter, some of the basic ideas of thisapproach are described here. Moreover, applications of these princi -
ples not only to the single mind, but to the functioning of two or
more minds acting as a single system, are proposed. These applica -
tions allow us to deepen our earlier discussion of states of mind and214 THE DEVELOPING MIND

their fundamental importance in creating internal experience and
shaping the nature of interpersonal relationships.
The brain is a complex system whose processes organize its own
functioning. This property is called “self-organization.”7We have
stated from the beginning that the mind emanates from the activityof the brain, and thus it is fair to say that the mind itself is complexand has self-organizing properties.
8Despite the huge number of neu -
rons involved and the nearly infinite variety of states of mind that
can be created, this conceptual approach helps us to make sense ofthe self-regulating processes of the mind. The following brief over -
view draws on a variety of related theories about systems, complex -
ity, and “parallel distributed processing” or “connectionism.”
9
Complexity theory is a mathematically derived collection of prin -
ciples governing the behavior of physiochemical systems, such as
groups of molecules or patterns of clouds.10The application of this the -
ory to biological systems, including the mind, has some fascinatingimplications. How can we equate clouds with the human psyche?
Aren’t inanimate objects and life forms fundamentally different?Remember, however, that biological systems are composed of basicatoms that are not alive. Complexity theory has been applied to anunderstanding of systems from molecules to societies, with extremelyuseful and unique applications.
11What makes living systems unique is
that they have evolved through natural selection into the adaptivelycomplex forms that make up life on earth. Evolution has yielded com-plex designs without a formal designer; the function of the complexforms has allowed them to be open to the external environment and toadapt to it over generations.
12In this way, living systems are open sys -
tems capable of responding and adapting to the environment.
What have these complex systems evolved to do? Given enough
diversity and the passage of time, organisms have evolved in waysthat enable them to survive and reproduce. This is the fundamentalprinciple of natural selection. How well a trait works within a partic -
ular environment determines whether a species will maintain the trait
in subsequent generations. In this way, a living system is organized toattain goals: to maintain itself and to pass on its genes. The humannervous system, particularly the brain, has evolved to be specializedat solving problems. These problems can range from how to avoiddrowning to how to find food or a mate. The adaptive design of thebrain allows it to process specific forms of information in the serviceof achieving the fundamental goals of natural selection: survival andreproduction. The mind, as a product of the activity of the brain, inmany ways reflects this evolutionary process.
13States of Mind 215

But the brain has a physical structure of its own that is unique
to its evolutionary history. Certain regions, such as those for smelland vision, have become relatively smaller than those of our ances -
tors. Other regions, such as the neocortex, have become larger. It is
clear that the brain itself is composed of an intricately interconnectedset of neurons distributed in a parallel, spider-web-like fashion.
14
Studies of this “parallel distributed processing” are part of a perspec -
tive called “connectionism.”15The theory of natural selection does
not in any way contradict a connectionist view of the brain. Nor doeither of these two views preclude our understanding of the brain asan information processor. In fact, creating computers as parallel pro -
cessors, rather than as the serial processors of early computer design,
has resulted in learning capacities far more similar to those of humanbrains than could have been imagined. The issue is that the innatestructure of a connectionist set of interconnected processors, such asneurons, yields the ability to remember, compare, and generalize.This helps us understand how the brain carries out these fundamen-tal functions that permit the processing of information.
One way in which a connectionist model functions is to place
“weights” or degrees of “strength” on the connections among basicelements, such as the neurons in the case of the brain. When the rela-tive strengths of the synaptic connections are altered, the informationcontained within the patterns of firing can be modified.
16Subtle and
rapid alterations in synaptic strengths are products of learning; theability to have connection strengths in general is innate.
17Some of
these connection strengths may be predetermined by our geneticinheritance: Our brains may be preprogrammed to create systemsthat tend to process certain forms of input preferentially, such as thefaces of attachment figures in the case of our attachment systems.These innate values are of evolutionary benefit and remain encodedin our genetic endowment.
18But synaptic strengths are also deter -
mined by experience in a process that allows learning to occur. In
this manner, as we’ve seen, experience affects the brain by altering
the strengths of synaptic connections.19
Complex systems are also believed to have an innate property
that creates a sense of order, cohesion, and stability across time.Again, this is called “self-organization.”
20Natural selection, connec -
tionism, and information-processing views are all compatible with a
complex systems or “dynamical” perspective on self-organization.Evolutionary theory helps us understand how systems evolved intoadaptively complex forms designed to carry out specific problem-216 THE DEVELOPING MIND

solving behaviors. Connectionist theory helps us understand how
these skills in processing information can be carried out within thethree-dimensional substance of interconnected neural tissue. Special -
ized information processing helps describe the fundamental compo -
nents of the mind that reflect this evolutionary history and the physi -
cal reality of brain structure. Now we will add complexity theory to
the conceptual mix in order to understand how the mind organizesits own functioning—and its states of mind.
The theory of nonlinear dynamics of complex systems, or com -
plexity theory, provides several principles that will deepen our ability
to understand many aspects of the mind, from emotions to humanrelationships. As Boldrini and colleagues have stated, “the spontane -
ity, unpredictability, and self-organizing properties of nonlinear
dynamic systems are well suited to explain the notoriously spontaneous,unpredictable, and creative nature of human beings.”
21Dynamical
systems have three major features: (1) They have self-organizationalproperties, (2) they are nonlinear, and (3) they have emergent pat-terns with recursive characteristics.
22Let’s take each of these abstract
principles and try to make them clear and useful.
Self-Organization: The Movement
toward Maximizing Complexity
Within an individual living being, a driving force of development is
the movement from simplicity toward complexity. Esther Thelen has
proposed that in child development, increasingly sophisticated abili -
ties, such as reaching, crawling, and walking, can be viewed from
this perspective as reflections of the increasingly complex patterns ofthe child’s behavior.
23The unfolding of the development of human
beings throughout the lifespan from this point of view can be seen asgoverned by this movement toward increasing complexity. Ratherthan viewing children as having stepwise increments in their abilities,we can view development as the emergence of patterns of increas -
ingly complex interactions between children and their environment.
A child offers a variety of behavioral responses, such as trying tograsp a toy object, and then learns within a certain context that aparticular movement is coupled with a specific outcome, such asfinding the object. When the toy is then hidden under similar condi -
tions, the child attempts to find it where it was before. If the effort is
successful, the behavior is reinforced. From a dynamical viewpoint,the system is maximizing its complexity and therefore its stability byStates of Mind 217

pushing behavior forward, applying old patterns in slightly new situ -
ations. Every moment, in fact, is the emergence of a unique pattern
of activity in a world that is similar but never identical to a pastmoment in time.
Patterns emerge in interaction with the environment. Certain
patterns of coordination become fairly stable under specific condi -
tions or contexts. These reinforced patterns or states of activation are
called “attractor states.” A state consists of the activity of each com -
ponent of the system at a given point in time; with unfolding experi -
ence, especially with the presence of the value systems of the living
brain, certain states become more probable as they are engrainedwithin the system. A “state of mind” as we have defined it earliercan therefore be seen as an “attractor state” of the system. The prob -
ability of activation of a state is determined by both history and pres -
ent context or environmental conditions.
The ability to remember an event from a long time ago is an
example of an attractor state. If you try to recall your tenth day injunior high school, you may be unable to remember anything. How-ever, it you try to recall the most embarrassing day you experiencedduring junior high school, you may become flooded with visualimages and bodily sensations of that day. This activation of variouscomponents of your brain, the heterogeneous elements of yourdynamical system, assemble themselves in a pattern representingyour recollection of that day long ago. As elements of your brainbecome active, they may recruit other neuronal groups to join in thepattern of activation. Your value systems including your appraisalcenters, will have reinforced the strength of such an attractor state inthe infinite range of possible patterns of neuronal activation. In thisway, the self-organizational properties of the system create a sense ofordered complexity out of the trillions of synaptic connections thatcan be potentially fired.
In the brain, we can propose that emotional responses constitute a
primary value system that engrains patterns of neuronal firing andshapes the emergent states of activation of the system. As states becomeengrained through repeated experience and emotional intensity, theybecome more likely to be activated. These attractor states help the sys -
tem organize itself and achieve stability. Attractor states lend a degree
of continuity to the infinitely possible options for activation profiles.
Repeated instantiation (activation) of a particular profile of acti -
vations, a state of mind, can make such a configuration a deeply
engrained attractor state. What does this really mean? Think of this218 THE DEVELOPING MIND

analogy. A hillside is filled with tall, flowing grass in the springtime.
The snow has melted, and you seem to be the first person to take thetrail to this spot. As you look out from the top of the hill, you noticethat there are no paths toward the pond at the bottom. You wendyour way down to the pond, spend a few hours there, and then walkback up the trail that you created earlier, so as to avoid stompingdown any more grass. The next day, another hiker comes to the topof the hill, sees the pond, and without much thought follows yourpath down to the pond. He returns back up the hill the same way.Day after day, other travelers take the same path, carving into thevegetation on the hillside a path that did not exist before. The proba -
bility is high that other hikers will continue to take this pathway, fur -
ther distinguishing it from other potential routes. As the feet keep
pounding on the soil, any grass attempting to grow there will be flat -
tened. The trail becomes this year’s common pathway from the hill
to the pond.
Such is the case for states of mind. With repeated activation, the
state of mind becomes more deeply engrained, and the state is remem-bered. According to Hebb’s axiom (“Neurons that fire together wiretogether”), the brain is more likely to activate this clustering of pro-cesses in the future as a cohesive state of mind. As we’ll see, the mindalso has a self-reinforcing quality to its organization, which serves asthe mechanism for such reinforcement. Post and Weiss have provided adevelopmental perspective on Hebb’s axiom: “Neurons which firetogether, survive together, and wire together.
24Thus repeated states of
activation at critical early periods of development shape the structureof neuronal circuits, which then form the functional basis for enduringpatterns of states of mind within the individual.
Stability of the system is achieved by the movement toward
maximizing complexity. Complexity does not come from random
activation, but instead is enhanced by a balance between the continu -
ity and flexibility of the system. “Continuity” refers to the strength
of previously achieved states, and therefore the probability of theirrepetition; it implies sameness, familiarity, and predictability. “Flexi -
bility” indicates the system’s degree of sensitivity to environmental
conditions; it involves the capacity for variability, novelty, and uncer -
tainty. The ability to produce new variations allows the system to
adapt to the environment. However, excessive variation or flexibilityleads toward random activation. On the other hand, rigid adherenceto previously engrained states produces excessive continuity and min -
imizes the system’s ability to adapt and change.
25States of Mind 219

Even pathological developmental pathways can move toward
increasing complexity.26Complexity alone cannot be a criterion for
defining mental health. Mental disorder can be envisioned in part asrestricting the overall movement of the system in an adaptive mannertoward complexity by an imbalance in continuity and flexibility.Pathological states may force the system into a range of excessivedisorder or of rigidity; either one limits the movement of the systemas a whole toward emerging complexity and adaptation to the envi -
ronment. As we’ll see in the next two chapters, examining the regula -
tion of emotion and the flow of states of mind across time may serve
as an important measure of the whole system’s coherent functioning.An individual may experience relatively cohesive states that, in isola -
tion, may function fairly well. However, the individual’s ability to
integrate states of mind across time into a coherent whole may berestricted if these cohesive states are themselves conflictual.
Nonlinearity
Dynamical systems are called “nonlinear,” the second basic principleof complexity theory, because a small change in input can lead tohuge and unpredictable changes in output. Part of this unpredictabil-ity is due to the context-dependent nature of the system’s response.The unpredictability also stems in part from the fact that the systemas a whole is inherently “noisy”; this means that there will be ran-dom activations that may or may not be reinforced by encounterswith the environment. Systems have both determinate (predictable)and indeterminate features to their behavior.
27Because of these fea -
tures, small changes in the microcomponents of the system can lead
to large changes in the macro-behavior of the organism.
In viewing the mind as a complex system, we can see that the
“dysfunction” at one level of organization may produce largechanges in the functioning of other levels and of the system as awhole. Within brain activity, one can envision these changes in thefunctioning of the mind as emanating, for example, from particularregions responsible for an emotion such as fear. In the case of obses -
sive–compulsive disorder, an excessive signal, coming from a limbic
system that “checks” the environment for danger and finds evidencefor fear when in fact there is none, can cause a cascade of responsesfrom other systems in the brain: a sense of panic, with heart rate rac -
ing; obsessions composed of complex, abstract thoughts about death;
and compulsive behaviors irrationally designed to avoid catastro -220 THE DEVELOPING MIND

phe.28Though the origin of a dysfunction may emanate from the
abnormal messages sent from one component of the brain, the cas -
cade of subsequent reactions can be unpredictable, can be huge, and
can involve a widely distributed response from other components aswell as from the brain and the mind as a whole. This is nonlinearityat its most painful, out-of-control worst.
On the more beneficial side of nonlinearity is the finding that
small changes in a person’s perspective, beliefs, or associations ofparticular forms of information processing can suddenly lead to largechanges in state of mind and behavior. For example, the art of psy -
chotherapy can be seen as finding a way to align oneself as a thera -
pist with a patient in such a fashion as to know what sort of change
is needed and what alterations in the constraints on the system mightpermit such changes to occur. Some of the most difficult kinds ofruts can be reinforced by deeply engrained, inflexible attractor states,including bad habits, intrusive memories, or isolation of informationprocessing. For some people, a small change in behavior or memoryprocessing can yield subsequent changes in mental set (or systemstate) that produce large changes in behavior and internal experience.The often challenging task is to figure out which system changes areneeded in order to alter the constraints on rigidly engrained attractorstates.
Emergent and Recursive Patterns
A third property of the nonlinear dynamics of complex systems isthat of the emergent and recursive properties of the patterns of orga -
nization. “Emergent” means that each of us is filled with a flow of
states that evolve across time. “Recursive” means that the effects ofthe elements of a given state return to further influence the emer -
gence of the state of mind. We are always in a perpetual state of
being created and creating ourselves. We will never be the same, andwe have never been quite the way we are right at this moment. Thisemergence of being as we flow from state to state is characterized byan underlying sense that there is an incredible amount of both free -
dom and cohesion within the system in a given moment. As a per -
son’s states of mind emerge in ways determined by the system’s own
internal constraints and by the external constraints of interpersonalconnections with others, the self is perpetually being created.
On a daily basis, we each experience this sense of emergence
when we enter a “bottom-up” mode of perceiving reality. The senseStates of Mind 221

of vitality in such living provides a window to the evolving quality of
states of mind and human experience. In contrast, recursive orrepeating patterns in these states can bring a sense of familiarity tothese new encounters. This recursive quality reinforces patterns ofrepresentational response learned from earlier encounters with theworld. This quality can be adaptive in allowing us to respond rapidlyto our perceptions of the world. When engrained and restrictive pat -
terns are taken to their extremes, however, the mind can become
deadened to the vital and emergent uniqueness of lived experience.
The recursive nature of complex systems is revealed in the
increasing specialization of a system’s trajectory of states. Early on indevelopment, for example, a wide array of states may be possible; asthe system or organism evolves, it develops a more limited set of pos -
sible states. This increase in the system’s differentiation, this special -
ization in the patterns of activation, is based on the coordination of
basic elements into a more highly coupled, integrated system. Suchdifferentiation may be a product of genetically encoded informationand the unfolding of developmental processes in transaction withexperience and the ongoing emergence of self-organizing brain statesacross time. Though at first glance such differentiation and the limi-tations in the flow of states with development may appear to limitthe system’s flow, such a differentiated system actually enables thestates of activation to achieve more complexity. In this manner, therecursive, self-perpetuating nature of development moves the systemtoward increasingly differentiated and integrated states. As we’ll seelater in this and subsequent chapters, when differentiated sub -
component elements become functionally coupled into a larger sys -
tem, such integration allows for continued movement toward maxi -
mizing complexity as the states of the system continually emerge.
Constraints
The system attains a balance between continuity and flexibility by
having the ability to modify what are called the “constraints” on thesystem. These constraints are both internal, including the alterationof synaptic strengths (as described above as a part of connectionisttheory and Hebbian associations) between neurons and neuronalgroups, and external, governed by interactions with the environment.The modification of constraints is not performed by a hidden
designer, a “homunculus,” or a “ghost in the machine”—that is,some mind within the mind whose purpose is to help the organismadapt or organize its functioning. Constraints are modified by the222 THE DEVELOPING MIND

mathematically predictable probabilities of the activities of the
subcomponents of the system. The mind organizes itself automati -
cally, based on its ability to modify internal or external constraints.
Adaptation occurs through modification of constraints. Self-
organization is dependent upon the modification of constraints in aneffort to achieve maximal complexity. Dysfunctions in self-organiza -
tion can be conceptualized as due to any pattern of constraint modi -
fication that does not permit movement toward such complexity. As
we’ll see, patterns of modifying constraints can be effective in adapt -
ing to certain environmental conditions at one time, but can produce
later limitations on the probabilistic movement toward maximalcomplexity. Such an adaptation may be the general process serving asthe source of psychological dysfunction.
29
Within given states of mind, dysfunction may be revealed as an
incohesive clustering of mental processes. In posttraumatic stress dis -
order, for example, intrusions of memory, hypervigilance, and exces-sive arousal are experienced as fragmented mental states. In the
states of mind characteristic of other disorders, such as personalitydisorders or chronic anxiety, there may be a semistable cohesivenessin which the isolated elements of the particular states of mind have acohesive functional quality within themselves. The semistable or tem-porary quality of this cohesion is revealed when the whole system’sconstriction is examined. At the moment of activation of a semi-stable cohesive state, other elements (such as memories, other emo-tions, more flexible thought patterns, or responses to others) arestrategically omitted from activation.
Attachment and Self-Organization
Attachment patterns illustrate how adaptation to the structure ofparent–child communication can result in children’s modification ofconstraints in characteristic ways to regulate their states of mind. Forexample, a securely attached infant uses both (external) communica -
tion with her mother and her own (internal) regulatory functions to
help organize her self-system. During the first few years of life, thisprocess involves a direct response of each partner to the signals ofthe other. As we’ve discussed in Chapter 3, Aitken and Trevarthenhave defined this as “primary intersubjectivity.”
30As the child devel -
ops into the second half of the first year, her ability to have a repre -
sentation of the mother, or a “virtual mother,” allows for the interac -
tion of the two to have a secondary intersubjectivity quality in which
the child’s perceptions of the mother are filtered through her expecta -States of Mind 223

tions of the virtual, mentally constructed representation of the
mother.
In the case of the securely attached infant, the perceptive, sensi -
tive, responsive, and predictable communication from the parent
allows a close correspondence between the infant’s virtual parent andthe actual parent. Cooperative communication involving the parent’scapacity to perceive and respond to the mental state of the child isthe hallmark of a securely attached dyad.
31These mutually attuned
experiences allow the infant to develop a reflective capacity thathelps to create a sense of cohesion and interpersonal connection. Theother’s mental state is a positive element in the infant’s life. Thesecurely attached infant is able to use the communicative experienceswith the parent to help regulate her internal state. Self-organizationis thus achieved through a balance in the infant’s use of external con -
straints (the attachment relationship) and internal constraints (the
internal representations of the caregiver and of the attachment rela-tionship itself).
An avoidantly attached infant, on the other hand, must rely pri-
marily upon his own (internal) constraints to keep his system func-tioning. The emotionally barren and noncooperative nature of thepatterns of communication lead to a nonresponsive virtual (represen-tational) parent and to excessive reliance on internal constraints toachieve self-regulation. Reflective functioning is not developed well,in that the mental state of the parent is not available to the child.The actual mother provides little sense of mutual regulation; theacquired virtual mother offers little internal regulation. The learnedautonomy keeps the individual’s system isolated from that of others.
Ambivalently attached infants find themselves excessively re -
sponsive to their inconsistent attachment figures and unable to
soothe themselves. Their virtual parents are unreliable; their internalworking models of attachment are filled with uncertainty; and theircapacity to self-regulate is compromised. Their distress becomes adominant feature in their interactions with others. Though reflectivefunctioning may be facilitated by the (inconsistently) available care -
giving, mental states are often experienced as intrusive and not help -
ful in regulating the self. These children come to experience an
approach–withdrawal cycle that leaves them in distress and yet cling -
ing to others in attempts to achieve self-organization.
Infants with disorganized attachments are unable to use either
internal or external means to regulate their internal states. They livein a chaotic internal world that reflects the external source of terrorin the parents’ behavior, which is incompatible with attachment and224 THE DEVELOPING MIND

a sense of security. These infants are prone to have fragmented self-
organizational patterns; achieving a cohesive state of mind is quitedifficult under stressful situations, especially those involving separa -
tion and threat.
32As noted in Chapter 3, these children are vulnera -
ble to developing dissociative disorders and are more likely to
develop clinical symptoms in response to overwhelming experiences.Reflective functioning may vary from state to state, as the parentsmay have been available in certain modes of being and quite threat -
ening in other states. These children’s fragmented internal worlds
come to resemble the fragmenting interpersonal communication thatshapes the development of their minds.
Beebe and Lachman’s studies of communication patterns within
various mother–child dyads have suggested the following findings. Inavoidantly attached pairs, vocal rhythm matching (in which theresponse of one person corresponds to that of the partner) demon -
strates a marked independence of communication signals. Each mem-ber communicates almost as if the other hasn’t been heard. With
ambivalently attached pairs, at the other extreme, there is an exces-sively matched pattern of response. Each individual acts as a tightlybound mirror of the other. Securely attached dyads have a midrangebalance in which there is clearly a correspondence between signals,but each member has the freedom to vary responses, which in turnwill be registered and contingently responded to by the partner.
33
We can propose that complexity theory can be applied to view
the midrange response in communicative contingency as the patternallowing the maximal amount of complexity to be achieved. In thissituation, we can suggest that two systems have become functionallylinked or integrated in a manner that allows them to function as asingle, complex system. Maximal complexity is achieved by the com -
bination of individual differentiation and interpersonal integration.
In contrast, being independent from one’s partner (as avoidantlyattached children are) is a situation in which the system of one indi -
vidual acts as if alone, decreasing complexity by way of excessive
internal continuity. Being tightly coupled with another, almost verg -
ing on intrusive matching or being paralyzed by being a mirror of
the other, also decreases complexity by reducing any variabilitybetween the interacting systems.
People may find themselves experiencing this range in vocal
rhythm matching with other individuals, often in nonverbal ways.Some people are exquisitely responsive to the most subtle nuances ofothers’ signals—a yawn, a glance out the window, a concerned look.Others seem, at least to an observer, to be oblivious to the other per -States of Mind 225

sons’ signals. This range of matching can be used to gain insight into
people’s present experience with others and reflections of past com -
munication patterns. As a dynamical system, the mind may be
restricted in its balanced movement toward complexity either byexcessive responsiveness to others or by an intense autonomy andresistance to joining with others’ states. Other people may tendtoward dissociative states in which the overall state of mind can onlybe organized by dis-associations of the component parts of mentalfunctioning.
STATES OF MIND ACROSS TIME
The activity of the brain creates the mind. We have reviewed howthis activity is composed of the flow of neuronal activations, orenergy, through a complex neural network that serves the purpose ofcarrying and transforming mental representations, or information.The processing of this information allows the mind to solve prob-lems. The specific pattern of the flow of energy through the braincreates a particular neural net profile of activation, or state of mind.Emotion and its regulation play a central role in determining degreesand localization of neural activation. Emotion is fundamentallylinked to the same circuitry that is responsible for creating meaningand value for mental representations. It is no surprise that particularemotions become associated with particular states of mind: Emo-tions, in fact, are a fundamental part of the process that creates astate of mind at a particular moment in time.
Marc Lewis has noted that the energy flow within states of mind
can be seen as a flow of information through a self-organizing sys -
tem.
34Emotions reveal the way in which a system regulates its states
of activation in processing information. This self-organization isdyadic—a part of the interaction between two people—and reflectsthe fundamental way in which the mind is created within interper -
sonal interactions and neurophysiological processes.
35As Schore has
commented, “These transactions represent a flow of interper -
sonal information accompanying emotion, and critical fluctuations,
ampli fied by positive feedback, lead to disequilibrium and self-
organization.”36The state of the system is dependent upon the
induc tion of alterations, or disequilibrium, in the movement toward
self-organization.37These alterations are created by emotional trans -
actions with others.226 THE DEVELOPING MIND

In clinical practice, therapists see a continuity of behavioral and
emotional responses that can make people inflexible, nonproductive,dysfunctional, and unhappy. Their minds have lost the capacity foradaptive self-organization and have become stuck in inflexible pat -
terns of activation. These are among the many reasons individuals
may come to a psychotherapist for help. Certainly people showunpredictable, spontaneous behaviors that seem to “come out ofnowhere.” These are “predictable” from the nonlinearity of complexsystems. As Boldrini and colleagues have stated, “In chaotic systems,several different patterns of movements are simultaneously presentand very small changes in initial conditions can alter the system’s tra -
jectory. The system can itself give rise to turbulence and, under some
circumstances, this leads to an evolutionary advantage, while, inother cases, it does not yield stability, but leads to intermittentchaos.”
38Often people seeking psychotherapeutic help feel stuck in
patterns of response and internal experience that they are desperateto change but have been unable to alter. To help patients alter suchan engrained and unhelpful pattern in the flow of states of mind,therapists need to consider how the brain establishes such a continu-ity across time and what interventions can be designed to changesuch a process.
Continuity in the flow of states across time is established in part
by internal constraints—the neuronal connections that have beenestablished by constitution and experience. In such a model of prob-abilities, the system moves toward increasing levels of complexitywhile maintaining elements of continuity, sameness, and familiarityin the face of new and unfamiliar activation patterns. The system byits very structure has a property that maintains some aspect of conti -
nuity. As the system produces outputs (behaviors in response to the
environment), these too can produce a somewhat consistent patternof reactions from the outside world, and thus can shape externalconstraints. For example, shy children may alter their responses tonovelty slightly, but their hesitation may continue to irritate theirparents, whose frustration continues to reinforce the children’s anxi -
ety. The result is that the seemingly “independent” variable of the
external (parental) constraints is actually directly influenced by thechildren themselves. As discussed in Chapter 5, some studies suggestthat behaviorally inhibited or shy children have a constitutionallyactive right hemisphere, which produces excessive withdrawal states.Negative responses from parents may reinforce such withdrawalreactions within their children. The system that began with a certainStates of Mind 227

characteristic predisposition establishes continuity through both the
internal and external constraints on its flow of states across time.
Information Processing
One way of viewing a state of mind is that the profile of activationincludes which modules of information processing are active, as well
aswhat they are processing. Of note is that certain circuits that func -
tion well in some states appear to be markedly impaired in depressed
states, as evidenced, for example, by decreased ability to detect facialemotion and the corresponding brain imaging findings of decreasedright hemisphere blood flow during these tasks. In depression, themodule for processing facial affect is impaired.
39The recursive (feed -
back-loop) nature of states of mind is such that the blockage of this
module may reinforce the intensity of the very state of mind thatproduced the blockage. In other words, the depressed person losesthe ability to utilize the facial expressions of others to help modulatehis own emotional state. External constraints become unavailable,and the person must rely on the isolated and depressed functioningof the internal constraints alone. Such a person feels and is truly dis-connected from others.
The selective activation or deactivation of information-processing
modules of the mind creates its own continuity in the creation of agiven state of mind. As Hofer has stated, “To accomplish variousage-specific tasks, the brain must be able to shift from one state offunctional organization to another and thus from one mode of infor -
mation processing to others within an essential modular structure.”
40
As clusters of neurons can become rapidly activated or deactivated in
the creation of a state of mind, the pattern of neural firing can reflectabrupt shifts in self-organization. The complex system of the brain isinherently capable of abrupt transitions in states. One way of charac -
terizing the nature of the brain’s self-organizing properties is through
its coordination of such transitions: When a brain remains stuck in agiven state, such as depression, or exhibits dysregulated and abruptshifts in state, such as in dissociation, this may be due to dysfunc -
tional self-organization.
How does the encapsulated episode of experience, the state of
mind, become reinforced by the process of self-organization? Thecharacteristic flow of information within a given state helps to defineits own boundaries. Being furious can lead to certain thoughts,images, and sensations that reinforce themselves in a rageful state. As228 THE DEVELOPING MIND

this processing begins to become more flexible, the intensity of the
state begins to subside, and the state dissolves into a more neutralflow of activations. In this manner, certain states have fairly defin -
able boundaries and characteristics. Others are more adaptive and
flexible in the patterns of activation that become clustered as a func -
tional unit. In these more “fluid” and “neutral” states, there may be
less easily defined beginnings and endings. Thus the flexibility in
information-processing modules may help define the flow of statesacross time, rather than merely the processing by itself.
Continuity and Self-States
As we’ve seen in the case of disorganized attachment, unresolvedtrauma, and dissociation, the mind is capable of clustering its mod -
ules and the content of their information within fairly distinct states
of mind. But is this the case only in those who have experienced dis-organized attachments or childhood trauma? The answer appears tobe no. Studies in child development suggest, in fact, that the idea of aunitary, continuous “self” is actually an illusion our minds attemptto create.
41Childhood is filled with normal examples of the many
ways in which a child must “be”—different roles to take, in order toadapt to different social contexts (with parents, siblings, peers, teach-ers). Adolescence is filled with new challenges to deal with the emer-gence of new “selves” with seemingly separate identities: a sexualself, a student self, a self independent of parents.
42Even in cognitive
science, the mind is considered as having many distinct “parts”responsible for a wide array of activities, from feeding and reproduc -
tion to affiliation and reading other people’s minds. As intelligent
beings with desires and beliefs, we attempt to achieve our goals byassessing our situations and applying our internal rules to interac -
tions with the environment. Our many layers of information process -
ing have unique sets of rules, as well as specialized problems they are
attempting to solve. Dividing these information-processing modulesis necessary to carry out efficient interactions with others in theworld. We have multiple and varied “selves,” which are needed tocarry out the many and diverse activities of our lives.
Alan Sroufe has defined the “self” as an internally organized clus -
ter of attitudes, expectations, meanings, and feelings.
43In his view, the
self emerges from an “organized caregiving matrix” that in part deter -
mines how the individual responds to and engages with or avoids the
environment. Relationships also determine how children interpretStates of Mind 229

experience.44An extension of this view, in combination with Susan
Harter’s research on the many “selves” of normal development, sug -
gests that the “selves” in which we live are dependent upon relation -
ship context.45Furthermore, our relationship histories may have
shaped particular patterns of feelings, attitudes, and meanings that aremore likely to become activated in the future. In these ways, historyand present context shape whichever “self” is organized in themoment. As relationship experiences are repeated, these “self-states”become repeatedly engrained and develop their own histories and pat -
terns of activity across time.
As we can see, both developmental studies and cognitive science
appear to suggest that we have many selves. Within a specialized “self”or “self-state,” as we are now defining it, there is cohesion in themoment and continuity across time. For example, a person’s sexual selfis made up of all of the states of mind that have been clustered overtime to deal with sexual information: sexual arousal from within, sex-ual interaction with others. This sexual self then has a continuity byvirtue of its connection strengths or internal system constraints, as dis-cussed earlier. Within this continuity is a sense of cohesion. That is, thevarious modules of the mind cluster together in the service of special-ized activity—processing information in order to achieve a particulargoal. Within this cohesion of the specialized self emerges a continuityacross time (in that self-state) of feelings, beliefs, intentions, memories,and so forth, which creates a qualitative sense of unity.
The mind as a whole, although it exists across time and is com-
posed of many relatively distinct but interdependent modules, func -
tions as a system itself. As a complex system, it is made up of
subcomponent specialized self-states, as well as itself being asubcomponent of a larger interpersonal system. Let’s continue toexamine this issue of the continuity across states by looking at theselves of the mind.
Here’s a bit of vocabulary clarification. We can use the term
“state of mind” to refer to the cluster of brain activity (and mentalmodules) at a given moment in time. This “moment” can be brief orextended, and states of mind can have various degrees of sharpnessor blurriness to their boundaries across time. The repeated activationof states of mind as time goes by—over weeks, months, and years—into a specialized, goal-directed set of cohesive functional units iswhat we are going to call a “specialized self” or “self-state.”
The most basic division is that between a private, inner self and
a public, outer self, which has been described in Chapter 4. Develop -
mental studies have examined how individuals struggle with their230 THE DEVELOPING MIND

various roles in life and how these may be composed of various
degrees of “true” or “false” selfhood.46Other examples of specialized
selves include sexual, affiliative, status-seeking, survival-oriented, and
intellectual selves. Clearly the divisions could go on and on, until we
get back to our basic unit of the state of mind in a given moment intime. And this is just the point: How does the mind create a sense ofcontinuity across states of mind, if it does at all?
The proposal here is that basic states of mind are clustered into
specialized selves, which are enduring states of mind that have a repeat -
ing pattern of activity across time. These specialized selves or self-states
each have relatively specialized and somewhat independent modes ofprocessing information and achieving goals. Each person has manysuch interdependent and yet distinct processes, which exist over timewith a sense of continuity that creates the experience of mind.
Susan Harter and colleagues’ developmental studies suggest that
certain self-states may conflict with each other.
47Such conflicts may
be a central source of dysfunction, especially during adolescence.Also, the more extreme the degree of “false selfhood” within special-ized selves, the more individuals may experience a sense of discon-nection from others and from themselves. How a person resolvessuch conflicts may be an important determinant of future emotionalresilience.
48The question may not be whether there is a sense of uni-
fying continuity, but how the mind integrates a sense of coherence—
of effective functioning—across self-states through time.
If people become stuck and disabled, if they are filled with adap-
tive specialized selves without a sense of authenticity, or if they arefilled with intense and unresolved conflicts across self-states, then thedevelopment of a specific process that integrates the selves across timemay become important. Clinicians often encounter patients who face
these dilemmas. Catalyzing the development of such an integratingprocess may be the central feature of psychotherapy for these individu -
als. The next chapters will examine how the mind achieves integration
and self-regulation, and how interpersonal relationships can assist peo -
ple in developing the vital capacity to transform their self-organization.
INTERPERSONAL SYSTEMS
AND DYADIC STATES OF MIND
Our review of complex systems and the example of how attachment
experiences shape patterns of self-regulation raises the issue of howStates of Mind 231

two individuals come to function as a dyadic system.49Various theo -
ries of social psychology and psychodynamics suggest that learning,
communication, role modeling, internalization, idealization, andidentification may each play a role in how children develop.
50From
the point of view of the mind as emanating from the activity of thecomplex system of the brain, we can look at the question of develop -
ment and interpersonal relationships from a different perspective.
Consider this view. The mind of one person, A,organizes itself
on the basis of both internal and external constraints. Internal con -
straints are determined by constitutional features and experience.
External constraints include the signals sent from others in the envi -
ronment. Person Bis in a relationship with A. A perceives the signals
sent from B,and A’s system responds by altering its state. Two
immediate effects are (1) that A’s state shifts as a function of B’s state
(or at least B’s signals), and (2) that Asends signals back to B. B in
turn responds to A’s signals with at least these two alterations, and
contingent communication is established. If Ais an adult and Bis a
baby, then the pattern of responses will shape the function and thedeveloping structure of B’s immature brain, not merely B’s present
state of mind. So what’s new about this view?
What’s new is that the patterns ofA’s response to Band B’s
response to Acan begin to shape the states that are created in both A
andB. A andBcome to function as a supersystem, AB.One can no
longer reduce the interactions of AandBto the subcomponents Aand
B;ABis an irreducible system. Systems theory provides a hierarchical
understanding of interpersonal relationships. For some people, sharingan “interpersonal state” is one of the most rewarding experiences inhuman life. For others, such dyadic states are occasionally welcome,but a hefty dose of isolation is preferred to the feeling of “disappear -
ance” that such an ABstate may create. Still others long for such a
union, but feel they can never truly achieve it. Even when they are“almost in it,” they fear it will disappear; that very fear can itselfdestroy the dyadic experience. Is this just another way of talking aboutthe different attachment patterns? Certainly the attachment ap -
proaches may represent variations on the fundamental “I–thou”
theme. There are selves, others, and their relationships together. Butsystems theory offers us a perspective and vocabulary on the con -
straints that help the system organize itself. These internal and external
factors provide a new framework for understanding how one mindjoins with others to form a larger functional system.
The imprint of a parent’s patterns of self-organization is mani -
fested within a child’s own patterns of self-regulation. In this way,232 THE DEVELOPING MIND

the joining of two systems into a single supersystem may continue to
show its effects even when the child is away from the adult, or whenthe child has grown up. For example, in children with disorganizedattachments and in dissociative adults, their chaotic and terrifyingexperiences with caregivers may have become not only a part of theirmemories, but a part of the very structure of their self-(dys)regula -
tion. Such is the effect of early trauma on the developing mind.
Understanding the behavior of complex systems can provide
insights into the sometimes automatic ways in which relationshipswith others seem to evolve. Looking toward the interpersonal stateas the fundamental unit of “self-organization” for a relationship canbe very helpful. For example, relationships that become stuck can beenvisioned as unable to move in a balanced way toward increasingcomplexity in their interpersonal states. Rigid styles of communicat -
ing and unwillingness to enter into intense sharing of primary emo -
tional states may lead to a sense of “deadness” in a relationship. Thestates of an emotional relationship may reflect both the elements of
the here-and-now communication and remnants of past patterns ofrelating. Individuals join with each other in creating a system largerthan the individual self.
Often the shift between states of mind within a dyadic relation-
ship may be quite subtle. Context changes can be hidden—induced,for example, by alterations in a companion’s tone of voice or facialexpression. The ways we join with another person in forming aninterpersonal system with its own emerging dyadic states can oftenbe quite rapid and nonverbal.
Let’s look at the example from earlier in this chapter of how an
adult can experience a shift in her state of mind when she returnshome for the holidays. If a family is viewed as a supersystem, a clus -
ter of the smaller systems of its individual members, then we can
begin to make sense of this common phenomenon. As we’ve seen, astate of mind includes the assembly of various processes via reentryloops, each of which may emanate from the activity of relatively dis -
tinct circuits in the brain. A state of mind involves the recruitment of
these various subsystems into activity together—in other words, thecoupling of disparate processes into a simultaneous set of reentrant,coassembled activating components. The adult child has her owndevelopmental history in which her genetics and repeated encounterswith the environment have reinforced her states of mind—specificpatterns of clustered neuronal activations that are sensitive to initial,specific environmental conditions. Her parents also have their owndevelopmental histories (part of which include having her as theirStates of Mind 233

child), which have created specific states and patterns of response.
They may have been quite happy during the years since their daugh -
ter has moved away, but somehow on these holiday visits things for
them, and for her, fall back into old patterns.
The context shift of the grown child’s returning home—possibly
sleeping in the same room, eating meals with her parents, having sib -
lings present, and experiencing other old and familiar conditions—
reestablishes a fertile setting in which each family member’s mind canrespond. The new contextual frame evokes old attractor states.Literally, what this means is that each of their brains is responding tothis new setting with an alteration in its individual constraints to makeold patterns of states of mind more likely to occur. The recruitment orcoassembly of components of the individuals within the family allowsus to see how the larger framework of a supersystem contains its owndevelopmental history, with attractor states and coupling processes ofits own. Recruitment is often automatic, without conscious awarenessor intention. The family now functions as a whole system, reinstatingits old attractor states. For the adult child, the experience may be one ofbeing drawn back into old sensations and patterns of behavior withouther initial awareness or sense of control.
Recall that states of mind contain the clustering of perceptual
biasing, behavioral response patterns, emotional tone and regulation,memory processing, and mental models. For the adult child’s parents,all of this may involve interpreting her behavior as oppositional,being harsh and critical in their own behavior, feeling scared and dis-trustful of her, recalling various conflicts she’s had with them, andhaving a mental model of her as an impulsive, uncooperative teen -
ager. Their shift in state probably occurs simultaneously with their
daughter’s. She may view their behavior as controlling and insensi -
tive to her needs; she may find herself responding to them with
impatience and disrespect; she may feel angry and disappointed, andchallenged to keep these feelings from overwhelming her; she mayhave easier access to the memories of the painful years of her adoles -
cence; and she may have a mental model of her parents as being
unsupportive and of herself as a victim of their shortcomings.
The rapidity with which these virtually simultaneous and instan -
taneous shifts in state can occur once the daughter arrives back at
her parents’ home is astonishing. Neither part of this supersystem isto “blame” for such changes. Each subset of the larger system is tak -
ing part in a shift in state based on present context. Subsequent,
often subtle, responses of one component to another reinforce the234 THE DEVELOPING MIND

“appropriateness” of such shifts for adaptation. The daughter may
find herself saying, “I knew I shouldn’t have come home. They neverchange. This is hopeless.” She may be right. Or she may be experi -
encing the tenacity of old attractor states, both within herself and
within her parents, and especially within the relationship system. Asher sense of helplessness continues, and the rapid interactions returnto their old patterns, the old and painful mental state configurationsare reinforced yet again. At this moment, she is in desperate need ofa “change”—a way of healing old wounds and lifting herself out ofengrained and dysfunctional patterns of dyadic self-organization.
Each of us needs periods in which our minds can focus inwardly.
Solitude is an essential experience for the mind to organize its ownprocesses and create an internal state of resonance. In such a state,the self is able to alter its constraints by directly reducing the inputfrom interactions with others. As the mind goes through alternatingphases of needing connection and needing solitude, the states ofmind are cyclically influenced by combinations of external and inter-nal processes. We can propose that such a shifting of focus allowsthe mind to achieve a balanced self-organizational flow in the statesof mind across time. Respecting the need for solitude allows themind to “heal” itself
51—which in essence can be seen as releasing the
natural self-organizational tendencies of the mind to create a bal-anced flow of states. Solitude permits the self to reflect on engrainedpatterns and intentionally alter reflexive responses to external eventsthat have been maintaining the dyadic dysfunction.
We are all nonlinear dynamical systems. This means that small
changes in input can lead to large, often unpredictable changes inoutput. It also means that a good portion of human behavior and thehuman mind are unpredictable in the long run. If this adult daughterbecomes aware of these old patterns and decides, consciously, not totake part in them, she may find that they begin to change a bit. Soli -
tude may permit the reflection necessary to enable her to initiate
such changes. If she then makes a deliberate effort to alter herstate—and especially her behavioral responses and patterns of com -
munication—major changes in interpersonal interactions may occur.
It takes diligence, but pulling out of the automatic reflexes of oldfamily patterns for many people is often worth the effort. Thedaughter’s changes in response, her internal awareness of her ownand the family’s processes, and her willingness to give up old beliefsthat “I am right and they are wrong” can each bring about an alter -
ation in system constraints, which can shift the patterns of the familyStates of Mind 235

system’s trajectory, its pattern of state shifts, and subsequent behav -
ioral patterns.
We have noted throughout this chapter that repeated activation
of states, especially those involving significant emotional intensityduring the early years of development, makes them more likely to berepeated in the future. In this manner, historical patterns of states ofmind, both within an individual and within a family system, maybecome characteristic traits. It is in this way that attractor statesbecome engrained within us and allow old interpersonal states tocontinue to influence our individual patterns of self-organization.
Rigidly engrained states produce reduced variability in the sys -
tem, which diminishes its adaptability to the environment and its
capacity to maximize the system’s complexity. Self-organization,always attempting to move us toward increasing levels of complexity,is inhibited if flexibility is reduced. Individuals, families, or groups ofpeople in whom states have become so engrained as to inhibit explo-ration of new possibilities can no longer grow and develop.
52The
subjective experience of such a condition is one of stagnation andmalaise. Infusing energy into a system, destabilizing old states, andbringing new life to a stuck set of patterns mean establishing a newbalance between continuity and flexibility—one that will allow foremergent states of increasing complexity. The dynamic experience ofsuch emergent states of mind within responsive interpersonal rela-tionships can create an electrifying sense of vitality.
REFLECTIONS: THE FLOW OF STATES
Emotional growth is based on the movement of dynamical systemstoward a balance between continuity and flexibility in the flow ofstates across time. A balanced flow of energy within the system—without either rigid constraints on which neuronal groups will berecruited (excessive control) or a chaotic, random flow of activations(excessive disorganization), such as in “strange attractor states,”which limit the complexity achieved by randomizing the recruitmentprocess—is a goal of emotional development. In other words, pastadaptations may have led to either excessively rigid or disorganizedself-regulation. Either condition limits the stabilizing movementtoward increasing levels of complexity of the system. These condi -
tions reflect emotional dysregulation.
The attainment of maximum complexity is a function of the bal -236 THE DEVELOPING MIND

ance between flexibility and continuity of the system. Flexibility is
based on the generation of diversity of responses and variation in theflow of states; it allows for the creation of a degree of uncertainty inthe novel adaptations to changing environmental conditions. In con -
trast, continuity emerges from the system’s learning processes, which
establish a degree of certainty in response patterns as determined byan engrained set of constraints. This balance between flexibility andcontinuity, novelty and familiarity, uncertainty and certainty, allowsa dynamical system to recruit increasingly complex layers ofneuronal groups in maximizing its trajectory toward complexity.
Over time, cohesive states achieve enduring continuity within
their organization as self-states. Each self-state is created and main -
tained in order to carry out specific information-processing tasks. As
environmental conditions change, the context-dependent nature ofstates leads to the instantiation of a particular self-state required atthe time. The healthy, adaptive mind is capable of entering a range ofdiscontinuous (but minimally conflictual) self-states, each with itsown cohesion and sense of continuity.
There are various ways in which cohesion and continuity may
be impaired. Excessive rigidity in a state of mind leads to an inabilityto try new configurations and to adapt flexibly to changes in theenvironment. Such rigidity may be seen in those with avoidantattachment histories, in which input from other people is eventuallyadaptively blocked in order to maintain self-organization. Homeosta-sis is achieved at the expense of the connections with others and withprimary emotional states of the self. In this manner, right-hemisphereinformation processing may be dis-associated from that of the lefthemisphere in order to maintain functioning. Such a person faces thechallenge of learning to create some tolerable level of disequilibrium,in order to allow the system to try new pathways toward balancedself-regulation. In such a case, we can envision strategies of mov -
ing toward growth and development as initially involving right-hemi -
sphere-to-right-hemisphere communication between two people.
Eventually, further internal change may be brought about by a pro -
cess facilitating integration of the right and left hemispheres within
the individual. Within a psychotherapy setting, such techniques asjournal writing, guided imagery, and exercises for “drawing on theright side of the brain” have proven helpful to catalyze such a newform of bilateral resonance.
In ambivalently attached individuals, states may be somewhat
fragile and easily disrupted. Cohesion may have a semistable qualityStates of Mind 237

that is particularly vulnerable to perturbation from social nuances.
Some such individuals may be quite sensitive to subtle nonverbalcues and inadvertent misattunements; these disconnections may leadrapidly to states of shame from which it may be difficult to recover.For other people, past histories of parental intrusion make theirsemistable cohesion hypervigilant to the intrusion of others’ internalexperiences into their own. In this manner, they may defensivelyguard against the perception of others’ minds, creating interpersonaldisconnection.
In individuals with disorganized attachments, two major forms
of dis-association can occur. One is within a state of mind at a giventime, in which there is a “strange attractor” state of widely distrib -
uted activations. In the second form, cohesive states are dis-associ -
ated from one another across time; that is, there is a functional isola -
tion of information transfer across states. Cohesion is achieved only
through the restriction in complexity achievable by this particularconfiguration of self-states.
Complexity theory suggests that self-organization allows a sys-
tem to adapt to environmental changes through the movement of itsstates toward increasingly complex configurations. Moving with abalance of flexibility and continuity, the system emerges within theinternal and external constraints that define the trajectory of statechanges. Internal constraints include the strength and distribution ofsynaptic connections within neural pathways; external constraintsinclude social experiences and attuned emotional communicationbetween people. By regulating these internal and external constraints,the self-system evolves through an emerging set of self-states thathave cohesion and continuity within themselves. The mind as a non -
linear system is also quite capable of abrupt shifts in constraints,
which lead to the instantiation of distinct, discontinuous self-states.The mind’s creation of stable systemic coherence across these self-states is one of the central goals of emotional development and self-regulation.238 THE DEVELOPING MIND

THE DEVELOPING MINDSelf-Regulation
CHAPTER 7
/fl2rt
Self-Regulation
THE CENTRAL ROLE OF EMOTION
IN SELF-REGULATION
The self is created within the processes that organize the activity of
the mind in its interactions with the world. As we’ve seen in Chapter6, such self-organization is a part of the fundamental ways in whichcomplex systems function. At a given moment in time, the array ofpossible mental activity becomes organized within a mental state thatfunctions to create a cohesive set of goal-directed processes. Acrosstime, we can understand how continuity is created within a givenself-state through the various principles of complexity, connec -
tionism, and information processing. Integrating these processes is
emotion.
As Luc Ciompi has described, emotions function as “central
organizers and integrators” in linking several domains: providing allincoming stimuli with a specific meaning and motivational direction;
participating in state-dependent memory processes; connecting mentalprocesses “synchronically” and “diachronically” (within one time
and across time); creating more complex interconnections amongabstract representational processes that share emotional meaning;and simultaneously attuning the whole organism to the current situa -
tional demands on the basis of past experience through neuro -
physiologically mediated peripheral effects.
1Such organizing features
intimately link what are traditionally considered the mental, social,
239

and biological domains. As Alan Sroufe has pointed out, then, emo -
tions are inherently integrative in their function.2
As we further explore the nature of the mind, we will find that
understanding the creation of the self at the interface of brain andhuman relationships focuses our attention on the fundamental ways inwhich emotion is experienced and regulated. As many researchers havesuggested, emotion is both regulated and regulatory. In its manifesta -
tions as neurophysiological events, subjective experiences, and inter -
personal expressions, emotion interconnects various systems within the
mind and between minds. Focusing on emotion regulation allows us toexplore how the mind becomes organized and integrated.
In this chapter we’ll explore some ways of viewing the regula -
tory processes that organize the mind. From a developmental per -
spective, the infant’s first challenge is to achieve internal homeostasis
via the activity of deep structures of the brainstem, which mediatesleep–wake cycles and other basic bodily functions (such as heartrate, respiration and digestion). Myron Hofer has described howeven at this early stage, the parent provides “hidden regulators” thatdirectly facilitate these basic functions in the infant.
3As maturation
unfolds, “dyadic regulation” becomes important in enabling thechild to modulate more complex states of mind.
4Attachment serves
as a crucial way in which the self becomes regulated. As the child’sevaluative mechanisms become more active, and memory processesenable the child to respond to discrepancies, subjective meaning iscreated in engaging with the social surround. Intimate attunementspermit a resonance of states of mind that are mutually regulating.Misattunements lead to dysregulation, which requires “interactiverepair” if the child is to regain equilibrium.
5Achieving emotion regu -
lation is dependent upon social interactions. At this early point,
according to Sroufe, the child has become an emotional being—notmerely a reactive one—in that arousal or tension is created viaevaluative appraisals that create subjective meaning in engagementswith the environment.
6As infancy gives way to the toddler period,
dyadic regulation is supplanted by “caregiver-guided self-regulation,”in which the adult helps the child begin to regulate states of mindautonomously.
7As the child’s brain matures into the preschool years,
the emergence of increasingly complex layers of self-regulationbecomes possible.
As emotion continues throughout life to function in integrative
ways, it reveals the continuing process by which our minds carry outintersystem integration: within our own modes of processing, acrossvarious modalities, and between our own minds and those of others.240 THE DEVELOPING MIND

As Antonio Damasio has noted, “Emotion, and the experience of
emotion, are the highest-order direct expressions of bioregulation incomplex organisms. Leave out emotion and you leave out the pros -
pect of understanding bioregulation comprehensively, especially as it
regards the relation between an organism and the most complexaspects of an environment: society and culture.”
8From our discus -
sion of complexity, we can see that emotion and the development of
emotion regulation move the self into more complex states of intra-and intersystem functioning. Emotion regulation that allows themind a flexible manner in which to emerge in interaction with theenvironment reflects optimal state regulation. As we’ve discussed inearlier chapters, the prefrontally mediated capacity for response flexi -
bility may be a central component to such a balanced capacity. Emo -
tion “dysregulation” can be seen as impairments in this capacity to
allow flexible and organized responses that are adaptive to the inter -
nal and external environment. As we’ll discuss, such dysregulationcan have its origins in constitutional elements, interactional experi-
ence, and the transaction between these two fundamental compo-nents of the mind.
9
DYSFUNCTIONAL PATTERNS
OF SELF-REGULATION
The structure of the brain gives it an innate capacity to modulate
emotion and to organize its states of activation. Sometimes referredto as “affect regulation,” this capacity is crucial for the internal andinterpersonal functioning of the individual.
10Any of a number
of psychiatric disturbances can be viewed as disorders of self-regula -
tion.11Among these are the mood disorders, in which emotional state
is massively dysregulated, producing states of depression or mania.Within these states of mind are characteristic dysfunctions in percep -
tion, memory, beliefs, and behaviors. These are disorders where the
unique feature is a profound instability in mood. Anxiety disordersalso reveal the flood of an emotion that evokes a dysfunctional stateof mind. Individuals with these difficulties may be excessively sensi -
tive to the environment and may also have autonomous signals of
impending disaster, as in panic disorder and obsessive–compulsivedisorder. Here, too, there is a marked incapacity to regulate one’sstate of mind. As individuals with these and other disorders (seebelow) develop, the instability of their states may become a charac -Self-Regulation 241

teristic feature, or trait, of their self-regulation. Indeed, in studies of
patients with bipolar disorder, the untreated swings between maniaand depression can begin to “kindle” the onset of more frequent,intense, and rapid cycling. In this way, the instability can become arepeated, “stable” feature of the individual’s self-organizational dys -
function.
12
In many of these disorders, a combination of pharmacological
and psychotherapeutic interventions may be indicated. Even if theorigin of the dysfunction is seen as the neural instability of someneuronal circuit in the deep or limbic regions of the brain, the mindof the individual is inextricably created by the brain’s activity. Aswe’ve seen in Chapter 6, dysfunction of a subcomponent in a systemcan have profound and unpredictable effects on other subcomponents,as well as on the system as a whole. For this reason, interventionsaimed at many layers of the functioning of the brain and the mindmay be essential in helping the individual achieve a more balancedand functional form of self-organization. Within the clinical setting,the relationship of therapist and patient becomes the “external con-straint” that can help produce changes in the individual’s capacityfor self-organization.
An example of the developmental origins of impaired self-orga-
nization can be seen within those with insecure attachments. Withthe experience of avoidant attachment, the mind learns to adapt tothe barren psychological world by decreasing the awareness ofsocially generated emotional states. The rigidity of such a con-strained pattern is revealed in the ways in which physiologicalresponses continue to express the significance of social interactions,which are cognitively blocked from being processed. In disorganizedattachment experiences, the child acquires the ability to respond tostress with a dis-association of processes leading to dissociativestates. Whereas some of these states are quite disorganized andincohesive, others have the appearance of functional cohesion. Closerexamination of even these dissociated states reveals a marked cogni -
tive blockage restricting the overall processing of information and
flow of energy through the mind as a whole. The apparently diver -
gent avoidant and disorganized attachment patterns actually share
the characteristic of restriction in the flow of states of mind. Thisconvergence is supported by the finding in the Minnesota Parent–Child Project that during the early years of life, before adolescence,disorganized and avoidantly attached children have the greatestdegree of dissociative symptoms.
13This finding supports the proposal
that impairments to mental well-being may be understood as adapta -242 THE DEVELOPING MIND

tions that impair the balanced flow of energy and information in the
formation of emerging states of mind.
As noted above, many psychiatric disturbances involve affect
dysregulation. In addition to mood disorders (such as depression andbipolar illness) and the anxiety disorders (including panic disorder,phobias, obsessive–compulsive disorder, and posttraumatic stress dis -
order), these include dissociative disorders and certain personality
disorders, such as borderline and narcissistic character structures.
14
However, rather than reviewing all of these disorders in detail, let uslook at a single case example to gain additional insight into thenature of emotion dysregulation.
“I couldn’t help myself. He made me so furious with his mis -
takes that I told him to go jump in a lake. Not in those friendly
words, of course. I was so angry. I wasn’t going to let him getaway with that kind of stuff again. Maybe for others it’s OK,but not with me. Why is everyone in this world so stupid?”
This thirty-five-year-old attorney was fired by her client of ten
years after screaming and apparently threatening a colleague at ameeting for missing a deadline in mailing a document she had givento him. This was not the first time her emotions had “taken over”:she had lost several boyfriends in the past for her “instability” andwas now at risk of being alone again, in addition to having lost hermost important client. For this patient, the inability to regulate heremotions was a major problem in both her personal and professionallives.
Interactions with other people long before this episode of scream -
ing at her colleague had historically evoked “sudden outbursts of
intense emotion” in this woman. Within our framework for under -
standing emotional processes, let’s examine what this phrase may have
meant for her. “Sudden” refers to the notion that something seems tooccur without a preparatory period giving some warning or clue that aprocess is even occurring. At a minimum, we can suggest that she wasnot consciously aware of the impending external expression of heremotional response. “Intense emotion” is a common term that we cannow interpret in the language of the mind. “Intense” probably signifiesa strong degree of activation or arousal, which became expressed inthis woman’s case as the categorical emotion of rage. So we have takenthis a bit further, but not much. Is this just the use of new words todescribe the familiar notion of an emotional “hijacking” or “out -
burst,” in which rational thinking is suspended and anger or otherSelf-Regulation 243

emotions cloud perceptions and influence behavior?15It is much more
than this, as we’ll see later in the chapter when we review this attorney’schildhood relationship history.
But, you may say, perhaps it was just this woman’s “genetic leg -
acy” to have uncontrolled outbursts of anger. Perhaps so. But in any
psychiatric conditions that may have a large genetic component,understanding the mechanisms of the mind and the contributions ofinteractive experiences can help provide interventions that can alterthe way the brain functions.
16Recall that the reduction of human
behavior into an “either–or” condition of “genetics versus learning”or “nature versus nurture” is unhelpful and clouds our thinkingabout the issues, especially when it comes to designing interventions.We will return to this example of the attorney toward the middle ofthis chapter, to examine ways of understanding how constitutionaland experiential factors can lead to certain kinds of emotion dysreg -
ulation.
A CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK
OF EMOTION REGULATION
The remainder of this chapter provides a conceptual framework for
understanding some basic components of emotion regulation. Theseinclude regulation of intensity, sensitivity, specificity, windows of tol-erance, recovery processes, access to consciousness, and externalexpression. This is not an exhaustive review of emotion regulation inits myriad manifestations, which can be found elsewhere in a numberof useful texts.
17Rather, this is a practical framework that draws on
our study of the mind in order to illustrate how individuals achieve aflexible and adaptive capacity for the regulation of emotional pro -
cesses.
The brain has developed a rich circuitry that helps regulate its
states of arousal. The nature of this process of emotion regulationmay vary quite a lot from individual to individual and may be influ -
enced both by constitutional features and by adaptations to experi -
ence. “Temperament” describes some of the aspects of inborn char -
acteristics, including sensitivity to the environment, intensity of
emotional response, baseline global mood, regularity of biologicalcycles, and attraction to or withdrawal from novel situations. Theseinborn features of the nervous system, which are the results of both
genetic and intrauterine factors, prob ably have powerful shaping244 THE DEVELOPING MIND

effects throughout the lifespan. Temperament can evoke particular
parenting responses and create its own self-fulfilling reinforcements,which further amplify the inborn trait. The example of a slow-to-warm up or shy child whose mother has little patience for his hesi -
tancy illustrates how the response of others can engrain temperamen -
tal features.
18
Attachment studies support the view that the pattern of commu -
nication with parents creates a cascade of adaptations that directly
shape the development of the child’s nervous system. Both longitudi -
nal attachment studies and early intervention research support the
idea that what parents do with their children makes a difference inthe outcome of the children’s development.
19It is important to realize
that both temperament and attachment history contribute to themarked differences we see between individuals in their ability to reg -
ulate their emotions.
If emotions influence the flow of states of mind that dominate so
many of our mental processes, how do we keep them in some formof balance? The mind’s ability to regulate emotional processes isessentially the ability of the brain to modulate the flow of arousaland activation throughout its circuits. Primary emotional processes,categorical emotions, affective expression, and mood can each beregulated by the brain. “Emotion regulation” refers to the generalability of the mind to alter the various components of emotional pro-cessing. The self-organization of the mind in many ways is deter-mined by the self-regulation of emotional states. How we experiencethe world, relate to others, and find meaning in life are dependentupon how we have come to regulate our emotions.
Why should emotions and their regulation be considered so cen -
tral to the organization of the self? As we’ve discussed in Chapter 4,
emotion reflects the fundamental way in which the mind assignsvalue to external and internal events and then directs the allocationof attentional resources to further the processing of these representa -
tions. In this way, emotion reflects the way the mind directs the flow
of information and of energy. The modulation of emotion is the waythe mind regulates energy and information processing. With this per -
spective, emotional regulation can be seen at the center of the self-
organization of the mind.
From the wide range of research on emotions, it is possible to
propose here at least seven aspects of emotion regulation that canillustrate these ideas.
20These divisions are derived from a synthesis of
scientific concepts and clinical observations. Other aspects of regula -Self-Regulation 245

tion could also be proposed, but these seven areas provide a practical
framework with which to begin to understand the various ways inwhich the mind regulates its own functioning.
Intensity
The foundation of emotional processing is the appraisal and arousalsystem, which can respond with various degrees of intensity. Thebrain appears to be able to modify the intensity of response by alter -
ing the numbers of neurons that fire and the amounts of neuro -
transmitters released in response to a stimulus. Degrees of arousal
have a wide range. If initial appraisal and arousal mechanisms give aminimal activation of the body and brain, then the elaboratingappraisal–arousal response will also be minimized. For example,studies have shown that subjects who are asked to meditate or whoare given pills to reduce bodily responses and physiological arousalwill interpret a stimulus as “not so important,” and the primaryemotion will not be as intense, as in subjects without such inhibitorsof bodily reaction.
21The body’s state of arousal is mediated by the
brain through the autonomic nervous system. As discussed in Chap-ter 6, the brain in turn monitors the state of the body and incorpo-rates emotional meaning from the somatic markers that serve as rep-resentations of the body’s change in physiological state.
The general pattern of high or low intensity of an individual’s
characteristic response may be a product of both constitutional andexperiential factors. People with shy temperaments may have aninborn tendency to respond intensely to new situations and to with -
draw when confronted with novelty. Geraldine Dawson has found
that intensity of emotional response appears to be related to bilateralfrontal activation, in contrast to the quality or valence of response,which is asymmetric (involving left activation for approach and rightfor withdrawal states).
22Other individuals may experience milder
degrees of intensity of emotion in response to novelty.
As noted in Chapter 5, Dawson has also found in studies of
infants of clinically depressed mothers that the infant’s capacity toexperience joy and excitement is markedly reduced, especially if thematernal depression lasts beyond the first year.
23Experience can thus
directly shape the general intensity and valence of emotional activa -
tion in children. In particular, the sharing of positive emotional states
may be missing from the experience of children with depressed par -
ents. The sharing of such states under normal conditions permits an246 THE DEVELOPING MIND

amplification of these pleasurable emotions, which sends both child
and parent “into orbit” with waves of intensely engaged positiveaffect.
24If such shared amplification of positive emotional states is
missing, as in depressed dyads, then the capacity to tolerate (to emo -
tionally regulate in a balanced manner) and to enjoy these intense
states may be underdeveloped. Interactive experiences enable thechild not only to experience high levels of “tension” or emotionallyengaged arousal,
25but to entrain the circuits of the brain to be able
to manage such states.26Feeling comfortable with intense arousal and
engagement with others may have its origins in both constitutionaland experiential features of the individual.
As we’ll see, intensity of arousal can be masked. It is often at the
moments in which emotion becomes most intense that we seem tohave the greatest need to be understood and the most intense feelingsof vulnerability. This sense of exposure may make many individuals,especially those with unsatisfying past experiences with communica-tion, reluctant to reveal openly what they are feeling. At a momentof intensity, a failure to be understood, to be connected with emo-tionally, can result in a profound feeling of shame.
27The shame gen-
erated by missed opportunities for the alignment of states—for thefeeling of emotional resonance, of “feeling felt”—can lead to with-drawal. Even with less intense states, not being understood may leadto a sense of isolation. Recognizing this vulnerability and the factthat moments of unintended disconnection are inevitable can allowus to repair such ruptures in alignment. Such interactive repair expe-riences allow us to learn to tolerate new levels of emotional intensityand the feeling of vulnerability that may accompany them.
Sensitivity
Each of us has a “threshold of response,” or minimal amount ofstimulation needed in order to activate our appraisal systems. Thosewith a hairtrigger response mechanism will find life filled with chal -
lenging situations by virtue of their brains’ firing off messages of
“This is important—pay attention!” frequently. Those with “tougherskins” will not respond with arousal and will be less emotionallysensitive to the same stimuli.
Sensitivity, like intensity, may be both constitutional and modi -
fied by experience. Both variables may also be dependent on an indi -
vidual’s state of mind at a particular moment in time. We can have
times in our lives when our “nerves are raw” and we react quickly toSelf-Regulation 247

previously innocuous events. We can also be not as sensitive as we
might otherwise be when we are preoccupied by something else oremotionally defending ourselves. Alterations in our threshold ofresponding may be an important way our brains regulate emotionalresponses.
How can a mind alter sensitivity? Again, by turning to the foun -
dation of emotions in appraisal, we can make some educated
hypotheses. By increasing the amount of stimulation a value centerneeds to become activated, the brain can directly decrease its sensitiv -
ity to the environment. Later on, modifications in the appraisal sys -
tem can decrease or increase sensitivity. For example, if you have
recently seen a violent movie with gunshots and murders, your mindmay be sensitized to loud sounds and dark alleys. If, upon returningto your car in a dark parking lot, you hear a sudden loud sound, youmay be more likely to become aroused and to appraise such a situa -
tion as dangerous. If you had just been to a party with a lot of noiseand fireworks, your mind would be less vigilant for signs of danger
and would be less sensitive to those same sounds in the dark parkinglot. Recent experience primes the mind for a context-specific changein sensitivity.
28
Repeated patterns of intense emotional experiences may engrain
chronic alterations in the degree of sensitivity. For example, over-whelming terror, especially early in life, may permanently alter thesensitivity of an individual to a particular stimulus related to thetrauma. If a cat scratches and bites a young child, the sight of even adistant cat may evoke a strong emotional response of fear in thisindividual for years into the future. Furthermore, early trauma maybe associated with an increase in release of stress hormones inresponse to daily life experiences.
29Early alteration of the circuits of
the brain involved in evaluative processes can deeply influence theappraisal mechanisms that directly influence the nature of emotionalexperience and emotion regulation.
One way of conceptualizing a therapeutic approach to excessive
sensitivity involves the basic stages of emotional processes. Someearly experiences that sensitize the arousal system to fire off maynever be fully desensitized.
30Patients may remain in a chronically
hypersensitized state. However, specific appraisal of the excessivelysensitive general arousal stage can be changed. Let us look at anexample of this “cognitive override” mechanism.
As a young child, a forty-year-old man had been mauled by a
dog; in the incident, he lost part of his left ear and sustained deep248 THE DEVELOPING MIND

wounds to his arms and chest. Throughout his youth he naturally
avoided dogs. As a young father, he dreaded the day when his ownchildren would ask to have a dog as a pet. He came to therapy whenthat day indeed arrived. What could be done? Every time he saw adog his heart would pound; he would sweat profusely, clutch hischest, and feel a sense of doom. This panic was once treated withmedications, which were effective but excessively sedating for him.The man wanted to get a dog for his children but couldn’t live withhis fear.
Some might appropriately say that parents should let children
know about the limits of what can or can’t be done. They might feel inthis case that the father’s need to have a canine-free house should havebeen communicated and respected. Another possibility—the one thatthis man preferred—was to try to “deal” with his fears. The originalaccident had happened when he was two years old. He had littleexplicit recall of anything from that period. We know, of course, thatthis was a normal part of his childhood amnesia; that is, explicit auto-biographical encoding was not yet available to him, due to the immatu-rity of his orbitofrontal regions. And so his primary form of memoryfor this event was implicit: He exhibited emotional (fear and panic) andbehavioral (avoidance) memories of the accident. Fortunately, he knewabout the experience from the stories he had been told by his parentsand from his own semantic memory. This knowledge was in a noeticform: He knew the facts, but did not have a sense of himself at thispoint in the past. Seeing his mauled ear in the mirror also remindedhim each day that something terrifying had occurred.
This patient’s amygdala was probably exquisitely sensitized to
the sight of a dog. As we’ve discussed in Chapter 4, a preconsciousfeedback loop involving the perceptual system and the amygdalawould have allowed for the fight–flight response to be initiated evenbefore he became aware that he had seen a dog. These functional cir -
cuits have been evolutionarily helpful to us as human beings: Once
we are hurt, our amygdalas will do everything they can to keep usfrom allowing it to happen again.
Teaching this man about the nature of the fear response and the
neural circuits underlying it was relieving for him. Relaxation tech -
niques and guided imagery with exposure to self-generated images of
dogs were provided. Nevertheless, he still had an initial startleresponse to dogs. A “cognitive override” strategy was then tried.That is, this patient learned to acknowledge the relevance of hisamygdala’s response to the present dog and the past trauma (the ini -Self-Regulation 249

tial arousal mechanism). He then would say to himself, “I know that
you are trying to protect me, and that you think this is a dangerousthing” (the specific appraisal stage). What he would say next waswhat eventually allowed him to buy his children a (small) dog: “I donot need to see this sense of panic as something to fear or get agi -
tated about.” He would then imagine his amygdala sighing with
relief, having discharged its duties to warn, and the sense of doomwould dissipate. After several weeks of performing these internaloverride discussions, he felt ready to proceed with the purchase ofthe pet. Six months later, he and his family were doing well with thenew addition to their household.
This example illustrates that even if the sensitivity to particular
stimuli cannot be changed, a person’s response to the initial arousal canbe diverted in ways that lead to a more flexible life. This may have beenmade possible by the development and involvement of his prefrontallymediated response-flexibility process. In this case, this individual’s pasttrauma had led to a rigid pattern in the flow of information processingand energy (the sight of a dog led to massive arousal and the sense offear). By altering the engrained patterns of both the flow of informa-tion and energy, the patient became more flexible in his behavior andhe was able to move forward more adaptively in his life. As we shallcontinue to explore, impediments to mental health may often be seen asblockages in information processing and energy flow. Experiences thatallow for these fundamental elements to achieve a more flexible andadaptive flow or “circulation” through the mind can contribute greatlyto emotional well-being.
Specificity
Emotion regulation can also determine which parts of the brain areactivated by arousal. By determining the specificity of appraisal—theways in which the value centers are establishing meaning of represen -
tations—the brain is able to regulate the flow of energy through the
changing states of the system. For example, being awakened by asound while taking a nap will probably lead your body to enter anaroused state of initial orientation. As your brain begins to processthis stimulated state, it can assign meaning to various aspects of thesound. If you are expecting the arrival of your spouse while resting,the context of anticipating your spouse’s return will be represented,and you may interpret the sound as a source of excitement. If insteadyou aren’t expecting anyone, the sound may be interpreted as a pos -250 THE DEVELOPING MIND

sible intruder and a signal of danger, and you may feel fear. The rep -
resentations activated at any particular moment, including the con -
text of the situation, help shape the specific direction of stimulus
appraisal elicited. The specificity of elaborated and differentiatedappraisal directly shapes arousal and thus determines the specifictype of emotional experience that unfolds.
Through its shaping of arousal, the specificity of appraisal
directly influences the differentiation of primary emotions into cate -
gorical emotions. Characteristic differences among individuals in
their appraisal mechanisms can directly determine the kinds of emo -
tions generated and can influence the general “nature” of their
moods and personality. Specificity of appraisal creates not only themeaning we attribute to stimulus events, but the meaning of the self–environment context and the form and meaning of the emergingemotional processes themselves. Specificity is thus a complex, recur -
sive process of evaluation that appraises the meaning of events andthe ongoing appraisal–arousal processes. The specificity of appraisal
may be influenced by several elements of the evaluation of the stimu-lus, such as the individual’s assessment of its relevance to the achieve-ment of current or future goals, its threat to the capacity of the indi-vidual to cope and to maintain the self as the locus of control, andits meaning to global issues regarding the self and the self in relationto others.
As a child develops, the differentiation of primary emotions into
categorical ones becomes more and more sophisticated. In this man-ner, there is a progression from the earliest states of pleasure or dis -
comfort to the basic or categorical emotions, such as fear, anger, dis -
gust, surprise, interest, shame, and joy. Sroufe has described the
“precursor emotions” of pleasure, wariness, and frustration/distressas preceding the development of the more discrete emotional statesof joy, fear, and anger, respectively.
31
As the child continues to develop, more complex and “socially
derived” emotions, such as nostalgia, jealousy, and pride, becomedifferentiated. Linda Camras has suggested that dynamical systemstheory may be useful in examining the development of emotionalexpression.
32From this perspective, the infant’s mind functions to
incorporate internal processes with interactional responses from par -
ents in the differentiation of the emotional processes within the inter -
connected domains of neurophysiology, subjective experience, and
expression. The more differentiated, discrete emotions come to func -
tion as attractor states that have internally and externally determinedSelf-Regulation 251

constraints. As described by Carol Malatesta-Magai, such a process
is a form of “emotion socialization,” which reflects the fundamentalway in which affect serves as a social signal and develops in part as areflection of interpersonal history.
33Such emotion socialization
occurs both within the child–caregiver relationship and in peer–peerinteractions.
34
The specificity of emotional experience is determined by the spe -
cific complex layers of appraisal activated in response to a stimulus.
These evaluative processes, mediated by our socially sensitive valuecenters in the brain, emerge within our individual constitutions andinteractional histories. It is for this reason that in the same situationtwo people often have such qualitatively different reactions. Uniquepersonal meaning is created by the specificity of our emotionalresponses.
Researchers have named a wide range of emotions in various
categories.
35Some of these include interest/excitement, enjoyment/joy,
surprise/astonishment, sadness, anger, disgust, contempt, fear, anxi-ety, shyness, and love. Other types have also been described, such asthe “self-conscious emotions” of embarrassment, pride, shame, andguilt, as well as a sense of exhilaration and humor. Individuals mayhave experienced many or all of these emotions at some point intheir lives. They may also have noticed that each time they experi-enced a given categorical emotion (for example, sadness), it has bothunique and universal aspects. As a state of the system is assembled, ithas unique features of both inner processes and external contexts.
The differentiation of primary emotional states into categorical
emotions is a rapid process illustrating how various layers of thebrain are influenced by the unfolding state of mind. In its essence,emotion is a set of processes involving the recruitment of various cir -
cuits under the umbrella of one state of mind. Thus the appraisal
and arousal processes create a neural net activation profile—a stateof mind—whose characteristics in turn directly shape subsequentappraisal and arousal processes. This intricate feedback mechanismhelps us to see why patterns of emotional response can be so tena -
cious in a given individual. The elements of continuity in specificity
are self-reinforcing.
Creating change within rigid patterns of specific appraisals
requires a fundamental change in the organization of informationand energy flow. As we have seen in the example of the man whoeventually bought the dog for his children, the alteration in sensitiv -
ity to the image of a dog took place at the level of altered specificity252 THE DEVELOPING MIND

of appraisal: The specific appraisal response to both “dog” and
“panic” needed to be revised before a new pattern of emotional reac -
tion could be achieved.
Value circuits determine specific appraisal, creating the basic
hedonic tone of “this is good” or “this is bad” and the behavioral setof “approach” or “withdraw.” Value circuits also continue to assessthe meaning of these initial activations as they are elaborated intomore defined emotional states, including the categorical emotions.What determines the nature of the appraisal/value process itself?How does the mind “know” what should be paid attention to, whatis good or bad, and how to respond with sadness or anger?
For human beings to have survived, this complex appraisal pro -
cess had to be organized by at least two components. According to
the fundamental principles of evolution, the characteristics of thoseindividuals whose genes shaped the appraisal process in a directionthat helped the individuals to survive and pass on their genes aremore likely to be present today. This is one explanation, for example,of why some people are frightened of snakes though they may neverhave seen one before. This may also explain why infants have a“hard-wired,” inborn system to appraise attachment experiences asimportant.
A second evolutionarily crucial influence on the appraisal mech-
anism is that it had to be able to learn from an individual’s experi-ence. Individuals who did not learn, for example, that touching aflame hurts would have been more likely to be repeatedly injuredand unable to defend themselves, and therefore less likely to surviveand pass on their genes. Those individuals whose brains could altertheir evaluative mechanisms would have been more likely to survive.Hence, the appraisal system is also responsive to experience; it
learns. Emotional engagement enhances learning.
Windows of Tolerance
Each of us has a “window of tolerance” in which various intensitiesof emotional arousal can be processed without disrupting the func -
tioning of the system. For some people, high degrees of intensity feel
comfortable and allow them to think, behave, and feel with balanceand effectiveness. For others, certain emotions (such as anger or sad -
ness), or all emotions, may be quite disruptive to functioning if they
are active in even mild degrees. The intensity of a specific emotionalstate may involve arousal and appraisal mechanisms outside ofSelf-Regulation 253

awareness. As we’ve seen, these nonconscious activities of appraisal
influence how the brain processes information. One’s thinking or
behavior can become disrupted if arousal moves beyond the bound -
aries of the window of tolerance . For some persons, this window
may be quite narrow. For such individuals, emotional processes mayonly become conscious when their intensity nears the boundaries ofthe window and is on the verge of disorganizing the functioning ofthe system. For others, a wide range of emotion may be both tolera -
ble and available to consciousness—from pleasant emotions includ -
ing joy, excitement, or love, to unpleasant ones such as anger, sad -
ness, or fear.
The width of the window of tolerance within a given individual
may vary, depending upon the state of mind at a given time, the par -
ticular emotional valence, and the social context in which the emo -
tion is being generated. For example, we may be more able to toler -
ate stressful situations when surrounded by loved ones with whomwe feel secure and understood. Within the boundaries of the win-
dow, the mind continues to function well. Outside these boundaries,function becomes impaired.
At its most basic level this can be understood in terms of the
activity of the autonomic nervous system’s branches, which will bediscussed in detail in the next chapter. Outside the window of toler-ance, excessive sympathetic branch activity can lead to increasedenergy-consuming processes, manifested as increases in heart rateand respiration and as a “pounding” sensation in the head. At theother extreme, excessive parasympathetic branch activity leads toincreased energy-conserving processes, manifested as decreases inheart rate and respiration and as a sense of “numbness” and “shut -
ting down” within the mind. Other autonomic combinations are
possible, with the most common being simultaneous activation ofboth branches; this creates the internal sensation of an “explosion”in the head and tension in the body, as if one were driving a car withboth the brakes and the accelerator on at the same time. Some indi -
viduals refer to such a state as “explosive rage.”
Under these conditions, the “higher” cognitive functions of
abstract thinking and self-reflection are shut down. The circuits link -
ing these cortical processes with the highly discharging limbic centers
are functionally blocked, and rational thought becomes impossible.In states of mind beyond the window of tolerance, the prefrontallymediated capacity for response flexibility is temporarily shut down.The “higher mode” of integrative processing has been replaced by a254 THE DEVELOPING MIND

“lower mode” of reflexive responding. The integrative function of
emotion, in which self-regulation permits a flexibly adaptive interac -
tion with the environment, is suspended. We can propose that under
such conditions, the dynamical system appears to shift away fromthe movement toward maximizing complexity by entering into statescharacterized by either excessive rigidity or randomness. These statesare inflexible or chaotic, and as such are not adaptive to the internalor external environment. The mind has entered a suboptimal organi -
zational flow that may reinforce its own maladaptive pattern. This is
now a state of emotion dysregulation.
A window of tolerance may be determined both by constitu -
tional features (temperament) and by experiential learning. Present
physiological conditions, such as hunger and exhaustion, may alsomarkedly restrict individuals’ windows of tolerance and make themmore vulnerable to irritability and “emotional outbursts.” The exam -
ple of temperamental differences reveals how windows can beshaped by individuals’ constitutional qualities. People with shy tem-
peraments may find emotional intensity of many sorts very uncom-fortable, and may seek environments that are familiar to them andthat do not evoke such disturbing and disorganizing inner sensations.Within the social context of being with attachment figures withwhom they have secure relationships, such individuals may feel safeenough to move toward novel situations. Without such a context,they may withdraw and become socially isolated. For others withmore adaptive sensitivities, novelty may be quite pleasurable, evok-ing a feeling of excitement that is not disruptive to their sense of bal -
ance. Familiarity in these bolder individuals may sometimes become
quite boring and create an internal sense of restlessness. Childrenwith “easy” temperaments are characterized by such open ap -
proaches; on the whole, they make life for their parents less demand -
ing. Those with the more irritable and unpredictable “difficult” tem -
peraments are “moody” and have frequent bursts outside of their
windows of tolerance, creating a challenge for many parents. As suchchildren mature, many of them find more sophisticated ways to regu -
late their emotions, with a subsequent decline in the frequency and
intensity with which they break through their windows of tolerance.
Windows of tolerance may also be directly influenced by experi -
ential history. If children have been frightened repeatedly in their
early history, fear may become associated with a sense of dread orterror that is disorganizing to their systems. Repeated senses of beingout of control—experiencing emotions without a sense of othersSelf-Regulation 255

helping to calm them down—can lead such persons to be unable to
soothe themselves as they develop. This lack of self-soothing can leaddirectly to a narrow window of tolerance. When such a personbreaks through that window, the result is a very disorganizing, “out-of-control” sensation, which in itself creates a further state of dis -
tress.
A person’s present state of mind can also narrow or widen the
window of tolerance. Being emotionally worn, physically exhausted,or surprised by an interaction can each narrow the window of toler -
ance. In such cases, an individual may become “emotionally wrought
up” or visibly upset by an encounter; under other conditions, theperson’s emotions might have merely indicated that somethingimportant was occurring.
Let’s return to the example of the attorney offered earlier in this
chapter. We cannot take the interaction with her colleague out of thetemporal and social context in which it occurred. The document theattorney had given her colleague was addressed to one of her mostimportant clients, a woman executive in her late sixties whom theattorney saw as a mother figure. She had always wanted to pleasethis woman, because she felt (as she later revealed in therapy) thather actual mother had never been supportive of her or able to bepleased with her. The colleague’s mistake (despite being remindedbefore the attorney left for a vacation, the colleague failed to mailthe document on time, jeopardizing their legal case) created a sensa-tion in the attorney that “yet again” she would be unable to pleaseher mother. In this case, displeasing a mother figure gave the attor -
ney an internal image, a cognitive representation, of herself in rela -
tionship to an angry mother. She had experienced as a child, and was
now experiencing again as an adult, the state of mind that wantingto please but being unseen creates: shame. What was worse, themother (and the business client’s image, in the attorney’s mind) hadfrequently expressed anger and hostility toward her, creating a senseof both shame and humiliation.
Some might ask how much of this patient’s recollection was
accurate, and, if it was accurate, how we can distinguish geneticfrom experi ential effects. This patient’s memories of these early
events were inde pendently supported after the patient entered ther -
apy by the recollections of a cousin who had lived across the street
and personally witnessed some of these humiliating interactions. Inan even more uncommon type of corroboration, the therapist wasable to interview the mother herself, at the request of the daughter.256 THE DEVELOPING MIND

The mother reflected on these incidents very much as the patient had
reported them; she also stated that her own mother had “practiced”such a style of parenting, in order to “harden” her for the “realworld.” Her treatment of her own daughter, she said, was intention -
ally a “watered-down version” of the treatment she herself had
received. Such single clinical case examples are not the same asresearch data, but they do offer us an in-depth example of how earlyexperiences of dysregulated dyadic states can be associated with thedevelopment of individual dysfunction later in life. Still, “associa -
tion” does not mean “causation.” After all, the mother passed on her
genes as well as providing a particular parental experience for herdaughter. Having an explosive temper—a form of emotion dysregula -
tion—can certainly be an inherited trait. The mixture of two individ -
uals, mother and daughter, each with a constitutional tendency to
break through windows of tolerance might help explain some of thispatient’s experience. The transgenerational passage of patterns ofhumiliating parenting could also explain such a finding. In any case,this woman found herself with the reality of dysregulation.
The repeated activation of these configurations of mental repre-
sentations and a state of mind of shame/humiliation can be seen tohave engrained this state as a repeating pattern of neural activation.We could almost say that the activation of this state had become apersonality trait. The attorney was prone to entering this state ofenraged humiliation at “inappropriate” times. In this manner, sheentered an inflexible state that was no longer adaptive and inhibitednew behavioral responses in interaction with the social environment.We can view this state as induced by the massive activation of theparasympathetic branch (the sense of not being understood or lis -
tened to when the colleague failed to mail the document on time
despite a reminder) and the sympathetic branch (the internal statethat she was being yelled at by her client and feeling anger towardher colleague) of the attorney’s autonomic nervous system. Thebrakes and accelerator were being applied simultaneously. The car,her mind, could not be regulated. The cues that set her off wererationally related to the earlier states, but the logic of these reasonswas of emotional and historical value only. Her colleague and herclient couldn’t care less about the “meaning” of her frighteningrages. She was removed from all of the client’s cases immediatelyafter this last incident.
With intensive work during the months following this turning
point in her life, the attorney began to become aware of the sadnessSelf-Regulation 257

and profound disappointment she had experienced as a child within
her interactions with her mother. She also began to connect themeaning of her present interactions with others with what she (hervalue system) had learned through these repeated experiences of herchildhood. Fortunately for her, this process apparently has allowedher to widen her window of tolerance for various disappointmentsshe continues to encounter in life, as we all do. Her understanding ofthese layers of response and learning yielded a more flexible mannerof relating to others and to herself as an adult.
Recovery Processes
When the intensity of an aroused state moves beyond the window oftolerance, a flood of emotion may bombard the mind and take overa number of processes, ranging from rational thinking to socialbehavior. At this point, emotions may flood conscious awareness.Some have called this an emotional “hijacking,” “breakdown,” or“flooding.”
36In such a situation, one’s behavior may no longer feel
volitional, and thoughts may feel out of control. Images may fill themind’s eye with visual representations symbolic of the emotional sen-sation. For example, when angry, some people may “see red” orvisualize doing harm to the target of their rage. They may lose con-trol of their behavior, performing destructive acts that would not bea part of their behavioral repertoire under “normal” conditions. Inthis “lower mode” of processing, the state of mind has pushedbeyond the window of tolerance.
As we’ve seen, emotion, meaning, and social interactions are
mediated via the same circuitry in the brain. Information in the brainis not handled independently of the biological reality of how thebrain is in fact structured. For example, within the convergencezones of one of the central regions of emotional processing, theorbitofrontal cortex, we can see the way in which brain structureshapes mind function. In this neural region, inputs from anatomicallydistinct areas converge: Neural firing patterns transmitting the“information” from these regions are directly sent to the orbito -
frontal cortex. This information includes social cognition, autonoetic
consciousness, sensation, perception, various representations such aswords and ideas, somatic markers representing the physiologicalstate of the body, and the output of the autonomic nervous system(which allows for “affect regulation” via the balancing of sympa -
thetic and parasympathetic branch activity).
37As we’ve discussed ear -258 THE DEVELOPING MIND

lier, the capacity to respond adaptively to the personal significance of
an event, not merely with an automatic reflexive reaction, mayrequire both the capacity for response flexibility as well as its inte -
gration with these other prefrontally mediated processes.
In states of excessive arousal, it has been suggested that the
“higher” processing of the neocortical circuits is shut down, and thatthe direction of the energy flow within the brain and especially with -
in the orbitofrontal regions is determined more by input from the
“lower” processing centers of the brainstem, sensory circuits, andlimbic structures than by input from the cortex. In this way, thebeyond-the-window-of-tolerance state of hyperarousal leads, neuro -
logically, to the inhibition of higher perceptions and thoughts in
favor of the dominance of more basic somatic and sensory input. Inthis situation, we don’t think; we feel something intensely and actimpulsively. What this means is that an individual who enters a stateoutside the window of tolerance is potentially in a “lower mode” ofprocessing, in which reflexive responses to bodily states and primi-tive sensory input are more likely to dominate processing.
In the attorney’s interaction with her colleague, she went beyond
the boundaries of her window and entered a state in which self-reflection, thinking about her emotions, achieving some distancefrom her reflexive reactions, and considering other options forbehavior beyond her immediate impulses were not possible. All ofthese are thought to be cortical processes that are likely to shut downwhen a person is emotionally flooded in the state beyond the win-dow. Having this patient learn the boundaries of her window of tol -
erance—that is, the points at which interactions with others began to
generate intense responses in her mind that moved her to the edge ofcontrol—was a first step in helping her to try to avoid those “out-of-control” states. Becoming aware of the state of her body (tension inher muscles, tightness in her stomach and throat) and sensing imagesof anger in her mind were the first stages in her gaining some senseof control over her emotional outbursts. Prevention of the rupturesthrough the window was the most helpful for her. She also needed tolearn techniques for increasing the speed at which she could recover,once she was out of the window.
How does the mind ever recover from this state of suspended
cortical processing and thinking about thinking (metacognition)? Therecovery process may vary from person to person, again dependingon present context, constitution, and personal history. Certain statesmay be easier to recover from than others; specific contexts may acti -Self-Regulation 259

vate a particular cluster of neural net profiles from which it is espe -
cially difficult to recover, whereas others may be more readily
repaired. For example, if a person feels betrayed by a close friendwho has never been suspected of being disloyal, then recovering froma flood of anger and sadness may be particularly difficult. On theother hand, being let down by an acquaintance of dubious reliabilitymay create anger that is relatively easy to bring back into the win -
dow of tolerance.
Recovery means decreasing the disorganizing effects of a partic -
ular episode of emotional arousal . Recovery may be a primary physi -
ological process in which appraisal mechanisms bring the degree of
activation to tolerable levels. This modulation may involve a damp -
ening in the intensity of arousal, as well as a restriction in the distri -
bution of neuronal groups activated within the state of mind at that
time. Recovery may also involve the reactivation of the more com -
plex and abstract reasoning that the cortex mediates. This will thenallow for the metacognitive processes of self-reflection and impulse
control. The capacity to reflect on mental states and to integrate thisknowledge about the mind of others and of the self may be impor-tant in enabling this aspect of emotion regulation. These reinstatedcortical processes in part may help by altering the characteristics ofthe elaborated emotion and permitting an individual to begin to tol-erate levels of arousal that previously would have been flooding. Forexample, the person engulfed in rage at a close friend may find thatactivating old memories of the friend and engendering a feeling ofloss and sadness may allow the characteristics and intensity of thisemotional experience to be transformed. For some, sadness is moreeasily tolerated than rage.
Some individuals have extreme difficulty recovering from emo -
tional flooding of any sort. For these people, life may become a series
of efforts to avoid situations that evoke strong emotional reactions.These avoidance maneuvers are defensive, in that they are attemptsto keep the individuals’ systems in balance. For those whose win -
dows are quite narrow for certain emotions, such avoidance behav -
iors can shape the structure of their personalities and their ways of
dealing with others and the world. If recovery processes are unavail -
able, then such individuals become prisoners of their own emotional
instability.
Emotions are central in the self-regulation of the mind. It is inevi -
table that at times emotional arousal will be too much for any of us to
tolerate. At these moments, the flood of emotions without an effective260 THE DEVELOPING MIND

recovery process will result in prolonged states of disorganization that
are ineffective and potentially harmful to ourselves or to others. Recov -
ery allows us to move back within the boundaries of our windows of
tolerance and to “push the envelope” but not to break it. In essence,recovery allows the self-organizational processes of the mind to returnthe flow of states toward a balance that maximizes complexity, movingthe system between the extremes of rigidity on the one side and exces -
sive randomness on the other. The system becomes more adaptive by
tuning itself to both internal and external variables in a more flexiblemanner, thus enhancing complexity, which allows the mind to achievestability.
How can recovery occur? Looking toward the two fundamental
elements of the mind—energy and information—can help us toanswer this question. Let’s return to the example of the attorney. Inher interaction with her colleague at the meeting, she remained in astate of hyperarousal, agitation, and rage, in which her cortical pro-cessing was surely suspended. The internal representations of the col-league’s deadline error were probably linked, as we’ve discussed ear-lier, to the attorney’s sense of shame and humiliation from
interactions with her mother. “Linked” means that the error createdwithin her a humiliated state of mind, with excessive arousal of bothbranches of the autonomic nervous system. This familiar statequickly flooded her beyond her window of tolerance. Her higherreflective processes were suspended. She began yelling at the top ofher lungs, feeling misunderstood, demeaned, and enraged. Anyattempts the colleague might have made to calm her down, shestated in retrospect, were interpreted as his being condescending (likeher mother) and further irritated her. For hours after she had yelledat him she remained in a seething, agitated state.
Recovery from that episode was long in coming. As time wore
on, she seemed to calm down, but was easily agitated by thoughts ofthe experience and of the eventual call from her client. As therapyprogressed, the therapist and patient began to examine what hadoccurred in terms of these ideas about windows of tolerance, emo -
tions, memory, and states of mind. She was very motivated at this
point to understand how her own mind was “betraying” her. Shewas eager to change this pattern of emotional outbursts.
Within the sessions, she would again enter these hyperaroused,
beyond-the-window states. Now entered the crucial elements ofchange. Within these states in the therapeutic session, her experienceof being “out of control” was joined by the reflective and supportiveSelf-Regulation 261

dialogue with her therapist. She was able to listen in her agitation,
but remained hyperaroused. However, she now had two objects forher attention—her internal state and the external dialogue. As timewent on, she was able to begin to reflect on the nature of her ownmental processes. She could picture her circuits with an excessiveflooding of activity; she could notice her tense muscles contributingto the feedback to her mind that she was furious; and she couldbegin to see how the deadline error meant something to her and herpast, beyond what the colleague and the mistake in reality wereabout.
This woman learned to enhance her recovery processes by learn -
ing to use the energy flow and information processing of her mind.
Therapy allowed her to experience emotionally flooded states, andwithin that state of mind, she was then able to apply her newly
acquired abilities. She could use relaxation and imagery to “lowerthe energy of her circuits” and the tension in her body. Her metacog-nitive cortical capacities were strengthened and made more accessibleduring her rages in ways that were not possible before. Such capaci-
ties allowed her to use previously inhibited pathways during thisstate of mind to alter the way she processed information. What hadbeen a blockage in information processing and an inhibition in theflow of energy now became more adaptive states of mind. Hercapacity for emotion regulation, and thus for self-regulation, becamemore flexible and more effective. She could say to herself, “Thisinteraction is more about my feelings of shame than about my col-league,” and focus her experience in a different way. The overallresult, fortunately, was that in addition to entering these states lessoften, she learned that she was able to recover from them muchmore rapidly. The effect was to give her a deeper sense of stabilityand clarity than she had ever had before. This was just the beginningfor this woman. Her next step, of course, was to work on gettingnew clients and establishing meaningful relationships with others inher life.
Access to Consciousness
As our appraisal mechanisms operate and as our primary emotionsare differentiated into categorical ones, our minds are influenced byour value systems in every aspect of their functioning. These influ -
ences occur without the necessity of conscious awareness. The idea
presented in this book is that emotion is a central set of processes262 THE DEVELOPING MIND

directly related to meaning, social communication, attentional focus
and perceptual processing. Emotion is not just some “primitive”remnant of an earlier reptilian evolutionary past. Emotion directs the
flow of activation (energy) and establishes the meaning of representa -
tions (information processing) for the individual. It is not a single,
isolated group of processes; it has a direct impact on the entire mind.By defining emotion in this way, we can begin to make sense of thewide range of interpretations of research findings on emotion, think -
ing, and social processes. Discussing the relationship of emotion to
consciousness provides a useful opportunity to delineate our ideasabout emotion further.
Huge amounts of evidence support the view that the “conscious
self” is in fact a very small portion of the mind’s activity.
38Percep -
tion, abstract cognition, emotional processes, memory, and social
interaction all appear to proceed to a great extent without theinvolvement of consciousness. Most of the mind is nonconscious.These “out-of-awareness” processes do not appear to be in opposi-tion to consciousness or to anything else; they create the foundationfor the mind in social interactions, internal processing, and even con-scious awareness itself. Nonconscious processing influences ourbehaviors, feelings, and thoughts. Nonconscious processes impingeon our conscious minds: we experience sudden intrusions of elabo-rated thought processes (as in “Aha!” experiences) or emotionalreactions (as in crying before we are aware that we are experiencinga sense of sadness). So we can say that for the most part, the self isnot divided by some line between a conscious and a nonconsciousself. Rather, the self is created by nonconscious processes, as well asby the selective associations of these processes into something we call“consciousness.” To put it another way, we are much, much morethan our conscious processes.
But then what do the “associations” of certain processes, such
as perceptions or thoughts, with the phenomenon of consciousnessdo? What does it mean to have consciousness? Why do we even haveconsciousness at all? One answer to these questions, among manypossibilities, is that when processes become linked within conscious -
ness, they can be more strategically and intentionally manipulated,
and the outcome of their processing can be adaptively altered . Con -
sciousness may allow us to become free from reflexive processing
and introduce some aspect of “choice” into our behavior. For exam -
ple, by making a worry about who sits where at a wedding into a
conscious concern rather than a nonconscious fret, a soon-to-be-mar -Self-Regulation 263

ried man can raise the issue with his fiancée, and then they can
examine the options together; they can add new information andconsider alternatives to decisions, which then can result in the selec -
tion of what may prove to be a more satisfactory seating arrange -
ment. In this manner, a process made conscious can be directly
shared across individuals, and the outcome can be strategicallyaltered. The strategic manipulation, the introduction of choice, andthe sharing of information are made possible by consciousness. If thegroom is unable to be conscious of the meaning of his sensations ofdiscomfort or thoughts about the wedding, it is likely that he willnot bring up the issue for examination. What is a neuroscientificexplanation for how this occurs?
Consciousness is important for focal attention and working
memory, which allow information to be processed into long-term,explicit memory storage. As noted throughout this book, workingmemory is considered the “chalkboard of the mind”; it allows us theability to reflect on several (seven, plus or minus two) items simulta-neously. Such reflection allows us to manipulate these representa-tions, to process them (for example, to note similarities and differ-ences, create generalizations, and recognize patterns), and to createnew associations among them. Working memory allows self-reflectionand creates cognitive “choice.” In other words, it introduces the pos-sibility of personal intention and strategic, deliberate behaviors thatare independent of automatic reflexes.
At the most fundamental level, we have discussed that con-
sciousness involves the selective linkage or binding of representa -
tions, which then can be intentionally manipulated within working
memory. The idea of intention is itself a philosophical puzzle. Whatwe can say is that with consciousness, new information can be intro -
duced or new manipulations can be attempted within the mind for a
strategic purpose that is determined by the individual. Consciousnessitself is not necessary for information processing, but it is necessaryat times to achieve new outcomes in such processing.
From this vantage point, we can say that emotional processing—
the initial orientation, appraisal, arousal, and differentiation mecha -
nisms—usually occurs without consciousness. An individual’s con -
sciousness of these processes allows for the qualitative sensation of
emotion, experienced as a sense of energy, meaning, and categoricalemotion. Any and all of these sensations can be called a “feeling,”which explains why people of many different ages respond with arange of reactions to the common query of “How are you feeling?”264 THE DEVELOPING MIND

“I feel . . . up . . . down . . . excited . . . that this means the end of
our relationship . . . like I want to run and hide . . . that he didn’tunderstand my intentions . . . that I am bad . . . sad . . . angry . . .happy.” “Feelings” can therefore involve energy, meaning, behavioralimpulses, or the discrete categories of emotion. Why do emotionalprocesses enter consciousness? What information processing doesthis permit?
The ability to involve conscious processing with something as
fundamental as the creation of meaning, social relatedness and per -
ceptual processing certainly does give the individual an increase in
the flexibility of response to the environment. Having a conscious -
ness of emotions is especially important in the social environment.
Without it, we are likely not to be aware of our own or others’intentions and motives. Awareness of emotional processes has valuefor our survival as a social species: We can know our own minds aswell as those of others, and can negotiate the complex interpersonalworld with increased skill and effectiveness at meeting our needs.
Recall that consciousness may involve an integration of distrib-
uted neuronal activities that achieves a certain degree of complexity.
39
Effective processing within consciousness can thus be seen as the fur-thering of such an integrative process. Consciousness is more thanthe mere activation of representations in working memory that havebecome linked via the thalamocortical system and the lateralprefrontal cortex. Active, executive functions that direct the integrat-ed flow of energy and information—possibly mediated also bynearby regions such as the orbitofrontal cortex and anterior cin -
gulate—play an important role in the coordination of mental pro -
cesses and response.
40For example, Nobre and colleagues suggest
that recent findings regarding the orbitofrontal cortex indicate thatits activity may be important in “inhibiting prepared motor pro -
grams” and in “the tasks of motor selection and preparation requir -
ing withholding of responses. The orbitofrontal cortex participates
both in the redirection of the response based upon a violation instimulus contingencies and in possible changes of emotional state.. . . Activity in the orbitofrontal region is recruited as stimulus con -
tingencies change, interacting dynamically with the basic neural–
cognitive system that directs attention. The anatomical connectionsof the lateral orbitofrontal cortex support this ability.”
41Earlier we
have called such a capacity “response flexibility” and have suggestedthat such a process may be an important element in self-regulationand in the behavioral and attentional flexibility seen in the contin -Self-Regulation 265

gent, collaborative communication and coherent adult narratives
revealed in secure attachments.
What role does consciousness itself play in the regulation of
emotion? Consciousness can influence the outcome of emotional pro -
cessing . Conscious awareness allows for self-reflection, which can
enable the mobilization of strategic thoughts and behaviors and cantherefore enhance the flexible achievement of goals. This can be seenas the achievement of new levels of integration. For example, if aperson realizes that she is feeling sad about a friend who has lefttown, she can then write or call that person and reestablish contact.If, instead, her sadness remains nonconscious, she may never reachout to her friend in this way. Given the fundamental role of theappraisal system in distinguishing what is good and should beapproached from what is bad and should be avoided, emotions beingaccessible to parts of cognition that can consciously mobilize behav -
ior can be crucial in having emotion be effective in certain adaptiveways as a value system. Consciousness allows emotion to play a
more adaptive role in the individual’s behavior. But how does it helpregulate emotion?
Let’s return to the example of the attorney in psychotherapy to
illustrate how consciousness can permit two fundamental elements ofemotion regulation: the modulation of the flow of activation orenergy through the brain, and the adaptive modification of informa-tion processing. After her “explosion” with her colleague and herdismissal from the case, the attorney’s motivation to understand hersocial difficulties reached a peak. Though she had had a number ofbrief encounters with therapists in the past, this was the first time shefelt driven to examine what role she was playing in these difficulties.Earlier, she had focused on how troubled the world and other peoplewere. For the first time, she now became consciously aware of thepossibility that the source of her difficulties was within her ownmind.
Such a change in attitude was itself quite an accomplishment; in
this woman’s case, it was brought about by “hitting bottom” withher job. This new openness was a window of opportunity for ther -
apy to provide her with some new tools. In the therapy sessions,
therapist and patient began a dialogue in which they examined thepatient’s memories of experiences in both the recent and distant past.The patient was also coached to reflect in the present on her owninternal processes—in other words, to begin the development of hermetacognitive abilities. The therapist strongly encouraged this self-266 THE DEVELOPING MIND

reflection, knowing that it would be an essential tool for the patient
to learn in order to regulate her emotions. Metacognition gives thedeveloping minds of children (and adults) the ability to perform anumber of unique processes: thinking about thinking itself; forming arepresentation of one’s own mind; becoming aware of sensations,images, and beliefs about the self; and reflecting on the nature ofemotion and perception.
42
In formal terms, the mind develops the metacognitive capacity
for the “appearance–reality distinction,” which allows an individualto comprehend that what something looks like may be different fromwhat it actually is in the world.
43The notions that one’s perceptions
and ideas can change over time, and can be distinct from the equallyvalid ones of other people, are called “representational change” and“diversity,” respectively. Metacognition also includes the awarenessthat emotion influences thought and perception, and that one may beable to experience two seemingly conflictual emotions about thesame person or experience. Each of these areas became vital for thispatient to develop a more adaptive capacity for emotion regulation.
These metacognitive abilities often, but not necessarily, involve
consciousness. In this patient’s case, her lack of metacognitionrequired that it become a part of the focus of the therapeutic dia-logue; its not being an innate ability at this point in her developmentalso necessitated that she make it a conscious part of her processingof intense emotions. With time, these new capacities, which had tobe initiated intentionally and with mental effort, might become moreautomatic for her and might not require as much exertion of con -
scious effort.
Before therapy, this patient’s orientation, appraisal–arousal, and
differentiation processes were often out of her conscious awareness.At some point, her rage became expressed externally as her scream -
ing. Internally, she might first become aware of her emotional state
through a burning sensation in her head and an intense focus of herattention on the “evil” of the person with whom she was interacting.Her consciousness was linked to the elements of emotional process -
ing only when they burst through her window of tolerance in the
form of uncontrolled fury and perceptual distortions filled with sus -
picion. In this state, she literally viewed others as “out to get her.”
Some might say that she was projecting her anger onto others.Another view might be that she was entering a state of shame andhumiliation in which she was implicitly recalling an angry andbetraying mother. Whatever the explanation, her conscious aware -Self-Regulation 267

ness began at a time when self-reflection was impossible in such a
state of rage. Recall that in states of excessive arousal, higher cogni -
tive functions, including metacognition, are shut down. The key to
this woman’s development was to bring such “lower mode” statesinto a more balanced modulation. Conscious awareness of emotionalprocesses is always a beginning; in this case, metacognitive reflectionon these processes was essential to enhance response flexibility andself-regulation.
Therapy includes various aspects of an attachment relationship,
as well as the co-construction of stories, bearing witness, teaching,and role modeling for patients. Each of these was essential in takingthe next step with this frightened individual. Giving her a conceptualframework for how her emotions worked and influenced her experi -
ence of herself and interactions with others was vital in allowing her
not to feel “accused” of being defective. The shame state involves asense that something is wrong with the individual, and this emotionis often at the root of why patients have not developed the ability toreflect on their own contribution to their troubles. They may have aninner belief that they are defective, and they seek to hide from reveal-ing this “truth” to others.
As therapy permitted the patient to tell the story of her life, the
therapist could bear witness to the pain and vulnerability of her hav-ing been a child in a hostile family world. Making the link of theseemotional experiences to her present encounters, both with people inher daily life and with the therapist himself, allowed the patient toexperience firsthand these emotional processes at work. She becamesensitive to the subtle sensations of primary emotions long beforethey were elaborated into the categorical states that so often burstthrough her window of tolerance. These primary sensations allowedher to become aware of what was arousing to her (“This interactionnow has some meaning for me—watch out!”). They also permittedher to reflect on how the specific meaning of an interaction had thedual layers of her appraisal of its significance in the moment (“Whatis happening now with this person?”) and its parallel to historicalmeanings for her (“How does this relate to my emotional issues fromthe past?”). The important step for her was to associate primaryemotions with consciousness.
At first she continued to have outbursts, but these were less
intense and less frequent, and it seemed easier to recover from them.Her feeling of success at actually stopping such an outburst wasexhilarating. This allowed her to consciously alter her bodily268 THE DEVELOPING MIND

response by reducing the somatic marker feedback that was auto -
matically reinforcing the cascading cycle of appraisal and arousal.
This clearly allowed her to alter the flow of activation (energy)through her mind.
Simultaneously, she began a metacognitive analysis of the mean -
ing of these interactions and emotional experiences. She could recog -
nize that something “significant” was occurring, and was then able
to connect (that is, to note similarities and to work with generaliza -
tions within working memory) the recurring themes of being ignored
or misunderstood with her prior history of shaming and humiliatinginteractions with her mother. She was then able to examine themeaning of a representation (for example, the interaction with hercolleague was associated with shame) and compare it to those fromthe past (her interactions with her mother had been humiliating andshameful). Such a nonconscious linkage in the past had created anexplosion. Now, with conscious reflection, the same comparison per-mitted the outcome to be quite different: She altered the appraisalprocess to highlight a different aspect of the meaning of these repre-sentations. Previously, her mind would have nonconsciously notedthe similarity in the interaction and created a state of humiliationand outburst. This was an automatic component of the Hebbian syn-aptic memory process, in which past states were reactivated by simi-lar retrieval cues. Now, consciously, she was able to add the dimen-sion of metacognition. This allowed her to state to herself, “I ambecoming agitated because of the similarity of this interaction to myearlier ones, filled with feelings of shame. I am not a slave to thepast, and I do not have to react in a similar way.” Instead of thenonconscious, reflexive response, consciousness permitted responseflexibility and a more adaptive reaction. By acquiring the ability toreflect on the relationships among past, present, and future, thispatient was developing her capacity for autonoetic consciousness.She could choose not to become explosive. She could decide thatwhat was best for her was to alter her initial impulses and try toachieve her professional goals in a more productive manner.
Appraisal processes, operating even without consciousness, re -
cruit new neuronal groups into their active state of mind. The addi -
tion of consciousness to such a recruitment effort permits further
mobilization of a new set of processes: Consciousness allows for themanipulation of representations in new combinations within work -
ing memory, the chalkboard of the mind. Consciousness involving
the linguistic system and autonoesis allows for reflections on the pastSelf-Regulation 269

and future, moving us beyond the lived moment.44We are also able
to be motivated by our awareness of emotions, which then facilitatesmore strategically focused achievements that are not likely withoutthe involvement of consciousness.
External Expression
From the beginning of life, emotion constitutes both the process andthe content of communication between infant and caregiver. Simplyput, a baby’s inner state is perceived by parents, who in turn feel in aparallel manner themselves. The baby perceives the parents’ contin -
gent response, and the affect is mutually attuned. Later, in addition,
parents use words to talk about feelings and direct a shared attentionto the infant’s state of mind. The parents may state directly that thebaby is feeling sad or happy or scared, giving the infant the interac -
tive verbal experience of being able both to identify and to share an
emotional experience. This earliest form of communication in a set-ting of safety and comfort provides the child with a sense that heremotional life can be shared and be a source of soothing from oth-ers.
By the second year of life, the infant has learned the adaptive
behavior of not showing how she might be feeling. The social con-text in which an intense emotion is experienced may motivate thechild to “hide” her inner experience. For example, if the toddlerwants something but has learned that she will be yelled at if sheshows an interest in that object, it will be best if she keeps a “pokerface” and does not show an affect that reveals her true emotion. Forus adults, complex social situations repeatedly teach us the essentialability to mask our inner states from the criticism and harsh reac -
tions from others. Culture and family environments play a central
role in a child’s experiential acquisition of these often unspoken lawsof emotional expression, called “display rules.”
45
Studies of children and adults of various cultures demonstrate
that people may show emotions quite differently if they are withunfamiliar people or if they are by themselves. For example, onestudy showed that in the Japanese culture, facial expression showingemotional response to a stimulating film was quite evident if a sub -
ject believed that he was alone in the room. With the experimenter
present, facial expression was quite flat.
46If display rules tell people
not to show emotion, does this affect how conscious they may270 THE DEVELOPING MIND

become of their own emotional response? This may in fact be the
case: We use our own facial responses to become aware of how weare feeling. This fits in with the general view that the brain has a rep -
resentation of the body’s state, including states of arousal, muscle
tension, and facial expression, which it uses as information to regis -
ter “how it feels.”
47
The self is capable of at least two contextual states: a private,
inner, core self and a public, external, adaptive self.48Some authors
have used the parallel notions of a “true” and a “false” self. This ter -
minology, however, suggests that it is somehow false to adapt to
social requirements; instead, it may be more useful to accept that dif -
ferent contexts evoke different states in each of us. Repeated patterns
of social interactions can make a specific state, such as the maskingof internal emotions from the outer world, an important adaptation.There is nothing “false” about a mechanism of survival. However, ifthe brain often relies on the expression of emotion as a signpost ofwhat the individual truly feels, then this masking process certainlycan create a challenge to knowing one’s “true” response.
The regulation of emotional expression may assist the mind in
modulating its states of arousal by social and intrapsychic mecha-nisms. Socially, masking internal states can permit the individual toavoid an experience of interpersonal resonance, in which the contin-gent response of the receiver can alter the initial state of the sender.Masking inner states can also enable an individual to avoid beingmisunderstood, in which case the painful state of shame would beinduced. Within the individual, regulating affect can dampen the pos -
itive feedback loop in which an internal state is expressed externally
as facial expressions and bodily responses, which then are perceivedby the mind and heighten the initial emotional state. In both theindividual and social feedback processes, regulating external expres -
sion of an internal state can help to keep the state of arousal from
breaking through the window of tolerance.
A very difficult situation arises when an aspect of this form of
emotional modulation, the inflexible and “nonexpressive” regulationof affect, is so engrained that it becomes a rigidly and repeatedlyevoked state, or trait, of the individual. If there are no contexts avail -
able in a growing child’s life when the inner, private self can be fully
engaged in interactions with others, then the adaptive, external, pub -
lic self may perpetually mask internal states even from the individual.
This condition may be experienced by the person as a sense of notSelf-Regulation 271

knowing who she is. There may be a feeling that life is meaningless.
In emotional terms, this person’s access to awareness of her ownemotions has been repeatedly blocked.
The danger of chronically blocking general affective expression
is that it may also repeatedly inhibit the access of emotions to anindividual’s consciousness. The mechanism to block expression isunknown, but perhaps involves a temporary shutting down of thecircuits that control affective expression. As we’ve seen, theseappear to be primarily located in the right hemisphere, especiallyin the orbitofrontal cortex and the amygdala. Individuals withright-hemisphere lesions, for example, may have a reduced abilityto perceive others’ emotions, as well as to express and gain con -
scious access to their own. Furthermore, imaging studies of de -
pressed individuals (who show reduced facial expression) have
revealed a functional blockage in the activation of right-hemispherefacial perception centers.
49The implication here is that the expres-
sion and perception of facial affect may be neurologically linkedprocesses.
People vary widely in their ability to express affect. One way we
can begin to make sense of these variations is to conceptualize non-verbal signals as the external expressions of internal states of mind.Primary emotions are expressed as the vitality affects described as theprofiles of activation, including “crescendo” (increasing energy) and“decrescendo” (decreasing energy) states. A person reveals such vital-ity states in facial expression, tone of voice, activity of the limbs, ges-tures, and the timing and fluidity of these signals in interactions withanother person. These signals may enter one’s own awareness, andmay also directly influence the adjustment of one’s own state to thatof the other person. Becoming aware of both the external signalsfrom another person and those being given off by oneself can be cru -
cial. Reflection on internal sensations may be an essential aid in
knowing how another person may be feeling.
“Feeling felt” may be an essential ingredient in attachment rela -
tionships. Having the sense that someone else feels one’s feelings and
is able to respond contingently to one’s communication may be vitalto close relationships of all sorts throughout the lifespan. Suchattachments foster the interactive sharing of states, which facilitatesthe amplification of positive, enjoyable emotions and the diminutionof negative, uncomfortable emotions. The attuned communicationwithin attachment relationships allows such interactive amplificationand diminution to occur. The outcome is that each member of the272 THE DEVELOPING MIND

pair may “feel felt” by the other. For the developing child, the secure
attachment relationship provides the amplification that heightenspleasurable states and allows the child to engage in the self-regula -
tion needed to diminish unpleasurable ones.
The challenge of communicating internal states may be a bit less
demanding when it comes to the expression of categorical emotions.These more elaborated states of activation, with their cross-culturallysimilar patterns of expression that are probably embedded within thephysiological response patterns of the brain, seem to involve a differ -
ent form of communication. The studies cited above suggest that
some aspects of categorical affect are mediated by social displayrules. People sometimes mask certain intense feelings in the presenceof strangers; in other situations, people only reveal certain responses(such as smiling or laughing) in the presence of others. These find -
ings, combined with the developmental acquisition of masking cate -
gorical affects, support the social communication aspect of this formof emotion. The sharing of these states has a more “distant” quality
and can involve more of the classic sense of empathy as a state ofunderstanding another’s experience rather than feeling another’s feel-ings. We can feel sad when other persons feel sad, and we can rejoicein their excitement and joy. In this way, categorical affects can cer-tainly be shared as well. But categorical emotions allow us to becomemore actively verbal within the communication with others. That is,we can use words with roughly shared definitions to encapsulate theshared experience: “It must have been so sad to have that happen,”or “It is great to see you feel so excited about that event.” In thisway, the expression of a categorical emotion permits more linguisticdistance from a shared moment in a relationship than the “feelingfelt” of a primary emotional state alone.
Of course, categorical expressions are usually accompanied by
all the undefinable nonverbal signals of vitality affects that are reflec -
tions of the ongoing primary emotional processes. But the point here
is that the perception of a classic categorical affect, such as anger,sadness or fear, often overshadows the less classifiable and oftenmore “subtle” aspects of vitality affects. The “risk” of a predomi -
nantly categorical emotional communication is that one may begin to
use only one’s intellect in classifying what this particular emotionalexperience means, rather than attending to the unique meaning ofthat moment, both for the other person and for the relationshipitself.Self-Regulation 273

REFLECTIONS: EMOTION REGULATION
AND THE MIND
The capacity to regulate the appraisal and arousal processes of the
mind is fundamental to self-organization; therefore, emotion regula -
tion is at the core of the self. The acquisition of self-regulation
emerges from dyadic relationships early in life. Attachment studiessuggest that the type of interpersonal communication that facilitatesautonomous self-regulation begins with healthy dependence. Suchrelationships involve sensitivity to the child’s signals, contingent com -
munication, and reflective dialogue that permits the child to develop
coherence and mentalizing capacities. Achieving self-organizationoccurs within emotionally attuned interpersonal experiences. At theemotional core of attachment relationships are the amplification ofshared positive states and the reduction of negative affective states.As these dyadic states are experienced, the child comes to toleratewider bands of emotional intensity and shared affective communica-tion.
A proposed model of emotion regulation includes seven ele-
ments: intensity, sensitivity, specificity, windows of tolerance, recov-ery processes, access to consciousness, and external expression. Aswe’ve seen, early attachment experiences and constitutional variablessuch as temperament help form these emotion regulation processes.“Epigenetic” factors—especially the social experiences that shapegenetic expression and the experience-dependent maturation of thebrain—directly influence how neuronal connections are established.In early childhood, such epigenetic attachment experiences create theneuronal pathways responsible for emotional modulation. Con -
tinuing emotional development within adult relationships can utilize
the same attachment elements in helping to develop new paths toself-organization.
Lack of mental well-being may often be a result of emotion dysreg -
ulation. This may be experienced as abrupt ruptures of emotion
through the window of tolerance, such as episodes of rage or sadness,from which it is difficult to recover. In these ruptured states, the mindloses its capacity for rational thinking, response flexibility, and self-reflection. Waves of intense arousal and sensations of “out-of-control”emotion such as anger or terror may flood the mind. In these states, theindividual is both internally and interpersonally unable to function.Helping such an individual requires the development of a more effec -
tive self-organizational process. Metacognitive processes and mental -274 THE DEVELOPING MIND

izing reflective functions may be important in the development of an
integrative mode of processing, which is essential to achieve a moreflexible and coherent experience.
If constitutional features, traumatic experiences, or severely sub -
optimal attachments have produced maladaptive emotion regulation,
then individuals may be restricted in their ability to achieve emo -
tional resilience and behavioral flexibility. In some situations, a form
of “cortical override” mechanism may be useful. If there has beenexcessive parcellation (pruning) of corticolimbic structures, then thebrain’s ability to modulate states of arousal may be quite compro -
mised. Learning to use neocortical reasoning abilities to observe and
then intervene in reflexive initial dysregulatory responses is often ahelpful approach. What does this mean? When people move beyondtheir windows of tolerance, they lose the capacity to think rationally.This initial response may be difficult to alter if it is engrained withindeep circuits, such as those encoded early in life in the amygdala.However, the neocortex can override these responses and bring thedeeper structures into a more tolerable level of arousal. This can beaccomplished by any number of “self-talk” strategies in which imag-ery, internal dialogue and evocative memory (for example, evokingthe soothing image of an attachment figure) can be activated. Overtime and with continued practice, the frequency and intensity ofbreakthroughs into the “lower mode” of reflexive states beyond thewindow of tolerance can be significantly decreased, and the speed ofrecovery can be greatly enhanced.
Why is self-regulation seen as fundamentally emotion regula -
tion? Emotion, as a series of integrating processes in the mind, links
all layers of functioning. In fact, the study of emotion itself is essen -
tially the study of emotion regulation. Though emotion can be
defined as a subjective experience involving neurobiological, experi -
ential, and behavioral components, it is “in fact” the essence of
mind. “Emotional communication” is also the fundamental mannerin which one mind connects with another. Early in life, the patternsof interpersonal communication we have with attachment figuresdirectly influence the growth of the brain structures that mediate self-regulation.Self-Regulation 275

THE DEVELOPING MINDInterpersonal Connection
CHAPTER 8
/fl2rt
Interpersonal Connection
This chapter explores more fully what is known about how the rela-
tionship between parent and child enables the child’s brain todevelop the circuits responsible for healthy emotion regulation. Theintention here is not to imply that all or even most individuals’ trou-bles with self-regulation stem from attachment difficulties. Instead,the aim is to review how what is known about the emotional com-munication inherent in attachment can guide us to understand thenature of emotion regulation within interpersonal relationships. Suchan exploration allows us to look more deeply into the ways in whichone mind directly shapes the development and function of another—the essence of interpersonal connection.
How can one mind influence another in this way? By viewing
the substance of the mind as composed of the flow of informationand energy, we can envision the complex neural systems from whichit emanates as involving various dimensions: the parts of a singleneuron, neurons in synaptic connections, groups of neurons orga -
nized within specific circuits, or systems such as the left or right
hemisphere of the brain. The patterns of flow of information andenergy through such systems allows them to form more and morecomplex layers of systems. But how can the system of one minddirectly interface with that of another to create a “supersystem”?Just as we can receive information in various forms—from oral towritten to digitally transmitted via facsimile or electronic mail—sotoo can the energy and information of the mind be relayed via means
276

including the electric action potentials of single neuronal axons, the
patterned release of neurotransmitters, the physiological neuro -
endocrine milieu, and the complex neuronal activation of a neural
net profile.
The linking of minds occurs via different modalities of the trans -
fer of energy and information. The physical proximity of one indi -
vidual to another has direct effects that may serve as “hidden regula -
tors” conveying, for example, warmth and tactile stimulation.1Touch
may be an extremely important part of parent–child relationships.2
Some studies suggest that close physical proximity also directlyshapes the electrical activity of each individual’s brain.
3But even at a
physical distance, one mind can directly influence the activity—anddevelopment—of another through the transfer of energy and infor -
mation. This joining process occurs via both verbal and nonverbal
behavioral responses, which function as signals sent from one mindto another. Both words and the prosodic, nonverbal components ofspeech contain information that creates representational processeswithin the mind of the receiver. Other nonverbal signals, includingfacial expression, tone of voice, gestures, and timing of response,have a direct impact on the socially sensitive value centers of thebrain. The expression of these emotional elements of social signalsserves to activate the very neuronal circuits that mediate thereceiver’s emotional response: orienting attention, appraising mean-ing, and creating arousal. This emotional engagement with anotherperson creates a cascade of elaborated and differentiated appraisal–arousal processes, which serve to direct the flow of energy and infor -
mation processing within one’s own brain. It is in this manner that
the emotional state of the sender directly shapes that of the receiver.In complexity terms, such “external constraints” as the signals sentfrom another person have a powerful and immediate effect on thetrajectory or flow of one’s own states of mind.
As we’ll explore in this chapter, childhood patterns in the trans -
fer of energy and information between minds can create organized
strategies in relationships, which are revealed within characteristicbehavioral responses in attachment-related situations. The minds ofchildren learn to adapt specifically to the emotional communicationthey receive from their caregivers. Over time, such relationship-de -
pendent patterns may become engrained as strategies that are
employed in more general contexts. Aspects of children’s emotionregulation (such as adaptation to stress), cognitive processes (as inmemory and attention), and social competence (including peer inter -Interpersonal Connection 277

actions) have been related to attachment history.4In adults, one may
see characteristic approaches to interpersonal intimacy and autobio -
graphical narrative organization that reflect the development of this
experiential learning into generalized states of mind with respect toattachment.
ATTACHMENT AND EMOTION REGULATION
Given the important role of emotions in creating meaning, it isunderstandable why the biological system that helps organize the selfis so crucial in determining our subjective experiences in life. Theview that has been proposed earlier, and that is explored furtherhere, is that human emotions constitute the fundamental value sys -
tem the brain uses to help organize its functioning. The regulation of
emotions is thus the essence of self-organization. The communicationwith and about emotions between parent and infant directly shapesthe child’s ability to organize the self.
Allan Schore’s work on affect regulation provides an extensive
review of the neurobiology of emotional development.
5This section
highlights some of Schore’s views and integrates them with theframework for emotion regulation proposed in Chapter 7. Childrenneed to be able to regulate their bodily and mental states. Theyrespond directly to their parents’ neural activation patterns throughthe processes of emotional communication and the alignment ofstates of mind. A child’s response to a parent’s patterns can bedescribed as the child’s “internalization” of the parent. From a basicbiological perspective, the child’s neuronal system—the structure andfunction of the developing brain—is shaped by the parent’s moremature brain. This occurs within emotional communication. Theattunement of emotional states provides the joining that is essentialfor the developing brain to acquire the capacity to organize itselfmore autonomously as the child matures.
Reaching out from the brain to the body proper, the autonomic
nervous system helps to control the body’s state of arousal. This sys -
tem can induce excitatory, arousing, energy-consuming bodily states,
which are produced by the activation of one of its two branches,called the “sympathetic branch.” Examples of physiological re -
sponses to the sympathetic branch are increases in heart rate, respira -
tion, sweating, and states of alertness. The autonomic nervous sys -
tem also includes an inhibitory, de-arousing, energy-conserving278 THE DEVELOPING MIND

portion called the “parasympathetic branch.” The parasympathetic
branch mediates responses such as decreases in heart rate, respira -
tion, and states of alertness to the outside world.6
The sympathetic branch’s development predominates during the
first year of life. The parasympathetic branch comes on-line duringthe second year. This timing is helpful because as the infant becomesambulatory, it is important to have some way in which the primaryemotional states mediated by the sympathetic branch—interest/excitement and enjoyment/joy—can be modulated in order to inhibitpotentially dangerous behaviors.
7The sharing and amplification of
these positive emotional states, so common during infancy, can beseen as a resonance of the sympathetic branch activity of the twoindividuals. These upbeat states are a major part of the emotionalcommunication between infant and parent during the first year oflife. By the second year, when a child becomes able to walk, prohibi -
tions from the parent must be able to inhibit such activating emo-tional states in order for the child to remain safe. The baby must
learn to stop moving in the face of danger. For example, if a child isclimbing up the stairs, it is useful to have him learn what “No!”means: “Do not do that; stop what you are now doing.” Before thefirst birthday, most parental communications are alignments with thearoused, positive emotional states. After that time, inhibitory com-ments from the parent become more prominent.
How does the need for contingent communication—for the
alignment of states of mind between parent and child—influence thenature of parental behavior and prohibitions? How can these align -
ments occur if the child is learning that the parent may not share his
excitement about doing something? Navigating this balance in needsbetween mental state alignment and parental prohibitions is oneaspect of how the child acquires a healthy capacity for self-regulation.Let’s look at one view of the biology of this process.
Schore has described shame as the emotion evoked when a
child’s aroused state is not attuned to by the parent.
8Shame in cer -
tain degrees is actually an essential emotion for children to experi -
ence in order to begin to learn to self-regulate their state of mind and
behavioral impulses. However, Alan Sroufe has noted that althoughthis form of shame is inevitable and necessary, parents do not needto use shame intentionally as a strategic form of parenting.
9Shame is
thought to be based on the activation of the parasympathetic system(to an external “No!”) in the face of a highly charged sympatheticsystem (an internal “Let’s go!”). It’s as if the accelerator pedal (theInterpersonal Connection 279

sympathetic branch) is pressed down and then the brake (the para -
sympathetic branch) is applied.
Not connecting with a child’s active bid for attunement has been
proposed by Schore to lead to shame.10These types of transactions
are necessary for a child to learn self-control and then to modulateboth behavior and internal emotional states in prosocial ways.Shame, in this very specific sense, is not damaging. Emotional statesemerge from the patterns of changes in states of activation. Parasym -
pathetic states alone do not produce the feeling of shame. Shame
requires the dynamic profile of high sympathetic tone (a “crescendo”state) followed by onset of the parasympathetic system (a “de -
crescendo” state). Shame is different from humiliation. Shame-induc -
ing interactions coupled with sustained parental anger and/or lack of
repair of the disconnection lead to humiliation, which Schore hasproposed to be toxic to the developing child’s brain.
11
The orbitofrontal cortex—the part of the brain just behind the
eyes and located at a strategic spot at the top of the emotional limbicsystem, next to the “higher” associational cortex responsible for var-ious forms of thought and consciousness—plays an important role inaffect regulation.
12This area of the brain is especially sensitive to
face-to-face communication and eye contact. Because it serves as animportant center of appraisal, it has a direct influence on the elabo-ration of states of arousal into various types of emotional experience.Schore’s detailed conceptualization of this region’s role in attachmentrelationships helps describe the steps involved between emotionalattunement and affect regulation.
A brief word on terms may be useful at this point. Researchers
have used the term “affect attunement” to refer to the ways in whichinternal emotional states are brought into external communicationwith each other within infant–caregiver interactions.
13Schore uses the
term “attune ment” in this manner, highlighting the importance of
this communication in the interactive experiences upon which thebrain’s development depends. He and others have suggested thatwhat are attuned are psychobiological states in both members of theinteracting pair.
14In this book, I am suggesting two related terms,
“alignment” and “resonance.” Alignment is one component of affectattunement, in which the state of one individual is altered to approx -
imate that of the other member of the dyad. Alignment can be pri -
marily a one-way process, in which one individual’s state changes to
match and anticipate that of the other; or it can be a bilateral pro -
cess, involving movement by each member of the dyad. As an exam -280 THE DEVELOPING MIND

ple of the former, imagine that a parent is preparing an excited child
to get ready to go to sleep. The parent is likely to be more successfulif he gets closer to the child’s state and then brings the child “down”to a calmer state than if he simply expects the child to calm downsuddenly on her own. Such an initial alignment allows the child tofeel that she is being attuned to by the parent, and then the mutualchange into a calmer state will be more readily achieved. Such align -
ments occur frequently, but of necessity they cannot occur all the
time. Attunement requires times when individuals are in non -
alignment—when they are not directly attempting to match or antici -
pate each other’s states. In this way, attunement is a broader concept
than alignment: It includes sensitivity to times when alignmentshould not occur.
The overall process of attunement leads to the mutual influence
of each member upon the other—a characteristic described earlier inthe book as “resonance.” Emotional resonance, for example, in-volves more than the alignment of states; it also includes the ways inwhich the interaction affects the individuals in other aspects of theirminds. Resonance also continues after alignment has stopped. Themutual influence of the alignment of states persists within the mindof each member after direct interaction no longer occurs. Attunementyields moments of both alignment and nonalignment, and it also per-mits emotional resonance to occur between two people even afterthey are no longer in direct communication.
The effects of attachment relationships and the process of
attunement on the mind have been postulated by Schore to havedirect impacts upon the orbitofrontal cortex.
15The orbitofrontal cor -
tex can facilitate the regulation of bodily arousal by pushing down a
kind of emotional “clutch” that disengages the sympathetic “acceler -
ator” and activates the parasympathetic “brakes.” The parasympa -
thetic system is later deactivated with realignment, and the proper
adjusted or regulated level of arousal is established through reactiva -
tion of the sympathetic system. In other words, the brakes are
applied with the disconnection; the repair process allows the child’senergies to be redirected, and then the accelerator is applied againwith resumption of the emotional connection during the repair pro -
cess. The child essentially learns this: “My parents may not like what
I am doing, but if I change my activities they will then connect withme; things in the end will be OK.” There is a balance between theaccelerator and the brakes. This is the essence of affect regulation.
The band of tolerable levels of activation of the autonomic ner -Interpersonal Connection 281

vous system—of either the sympathetic or parasympathetic branches—
may vary widely among individuals. Movements beyond this win -
dow of tolerance, in either the sympathetic or parasympathetic
branch direction, may be accompanied by diminished ability to func -
tion in an adaptive and flexible manner. Neither excessive,
nonregulated arousal (sympathetic activity) nor excessive inhibition(parasympathetic activation) is healthy for the development or theongoing functioning of the brain.
Parenting Approaches
Children challenge parents continually. How parents respond will setthe tone of their interactions and will shape the development of theirchildren’s capacity to regulate their states of mind and shifts in emo -
tions. Take, for example, a fourteen-month-old boy who wants to
climb onto a table with a lamp on it. One possible parental responsewould be to yell “No!” and then take the boy outside, where hisdrive to climb can be “attuned to.” Another response would be notto notice the attempt to climb, to hear the lamp come crashingdown, to pick it up, and either to tell the boy quietly not to do itagain or just to ignore him the rest of the evening. A third responsewould be for the parent to yell “No!” and reprimand the boy, hughim out of guilt, then distance herself from him because he has dis-appointed her. A fourth approach would be to become enraged andthrow the lamp to the floor next to the boy, to teach him never to dothat again. Which attachment pattern would be associated with eachform of prohibition/disconnection and repair? Think of how thechild over time would learn to regulate his baseline emotional stateas well as his aroused state in each case, if each pattern of interactionwere to be repeated many times. These four parental responseswould be associated with the attachment patterns of security, avoid -
ance, ambivalence, and disorganization, respectively.
Security
The first year of life is filled with the attunement of infant and
attachment figure, which often centers around the upbeat, high-vital -
ity affects of interest/excitement and enjoyment/joy. The sympathetic
system is being activated and developed at a high level during thisperiod. Children who become securely attached to their parents arelikely to have a good baseline autonomic tone. They are capable of282 THE DEVELOPING MIND

tolerating high-intensity emotional states. Specifically, if a pattern of
attunement like the first one described above is chronically repeated,the securely attached child will experience an aroused state (excitedabout climbing) that is responded to by the parent with a prohibition(inducing parasympathetic activation and a sense of shame), rapidlyfollowed by a repair (attuning to the gist of the initial aroused stateand redirecting it in socially acceptable ways). This child’sorbitofrontal cortex “learns” that even high-arousal states (in needof connection) can be modified, and then connection will be reestab -
lished. We can propose that such connection–disconnection–repair
transactions are one means by which patterns of parent–child com -
munication promote the prefrontally mediated capacity for response
flexibility.
Avoidance
The avoidantly attached child is not so fortunate and learns little aboutthe emotional state of the parent, with no warning about the parentalresponse, which in fact may be quite uninvolved (neglectful) or severeand misattuned (rejecting). In such a dyad, it is likely that the generallevel of shared emotion is quite low, possibly resulting in an underde-velopment of the child’s capacity for normal levels of interest/excite-ment and enjoyment/joy. Prohibitions may be behaviorally severe andemotionally disconnected. This, coupled with the generally low levelsof attunement and sensitivity to the child’s signals, may produce anexcess in overall parasympathetic tone. The child’s early experiencemay have a significant impact on the expression of affect and access toconscious awareness of emotion. The child learns to minimize theexpression of attachment-related emotion, which may serve to reducethe disabling effects of overwhelming frustration in the face of continu -
ing interactions with the caregiver.
16
Ambivalence
In the third approach, parental facial expressions of continued disap -
proval, eye gaze aversion, and body language of disconnection or
anger are all perceived by the child. The child’s high-arousal statesmay be attuned to sometimes, but if they are not, disconnection andshame may be associated with humiliation and may thus becometoxic, especially if disconnection is prolonged or associated withparental anger. The child’s range of tolerable emotional arousal mayInterpersonal Connection 283

be broad, but uncontrollable swings beyond the window of tolerance
may occur. Inconsistent attunements and repair may lead to excessivearousal, so that the sympathetic system may often be uncheckedbecause of a diminished parasympathetic system response. Alterna -
tively, prolonged despair may result if the parasympathetic system is
excessively activated. Anticipatory anxiety and fear of separationmay be evident. Separation in the ambivalently attached child meanshaving to rely on the self for ineffective emotion regulation. Repeatedexperiences of going beyond tolerable levels with excessive arousal ordespair teaches these children that they themselves are unreliableaffect modulators; this is the reason for their paradoxical excessivereliance on the inconsistent attachment figures. Such experiences mayproduce an apparent increase in a child’s sensitivity, especially inrelationship to interactions with others and to situations of loss andseparation. Overall, there is a maximizing of the expression ofattachment-related emotions, which some authors suggest may serveto attempt to enhance the chances that the inconsistent parent willpay attention to the child.
17
Disorganization
In the fourth pattern, the child’s behavior elicits a rageful parentalresponse, producing terror in the child. This is not simply the child’sfear of consequences, but a fear for safety induced by the attachmentfigure. The child’s adaptation to this suddenly induced fear state(high levels of both sympathetic and parasympathetic discharge) is aconflictual one: The accelerator and the brakes are being appliedsimultaneously. This is an example of a disorganized form of attach -
ment. The parent, often with unresolved trauma or loss as described
in Chapter 3, may unintentionally and unknowingly be providing thechild with a set of responses that are disorienting and disorganizing.As an attachment figure, such a parent has become a source of fearand confusion, not of safety and security. The intense and frighteningmoments of disconnection with the parent remain unrepaired. As theparent disappears into rage, the child becomes lost in terror. Thesedisorganizing and disorienting experiences become an essential partof how the child learns to self-regulate behavior and emotionalstates. The child has the double insult of becoming engulfed in con -
fusion and terror induced by the parent, and of losing the relation -
ship with an attachment figure that might have provided a safe
haven and sense of security.284 THE DEVELOPING MIND

RELATIONSHIPS AND AFFECT REGULATION
The lessons from attachment research can guide our understanding
of the powerful effect interpersonal relationships can have on thedevelopment and ongoing functioning of self-regulation. Studies sug -
gest that the orbitofrontal cortex remains plastic throughout life; that
is, it is able to develop beyond childhood.
18The orbitofrontal cortex
mediates neurophysiological mechanisms integrating several domainsof human experience: social relationships, the evaluation of meaning,autonoetic consciousness, response flexibility, and emotion regula -
tion. The nonverbal social signals of eye contact, facial expression,
tone of voice, and body gestures communicate the state of mind ofeach member of a dyad. The interactions that occur have directeffects on the emotional experience in that moment. Within the con -
text of an attachment relationship, the child’s developing mind and
the structure of the child’s brain will be shaped in such a way thatthe ability to regulate emotion in the future is affected.
The proposal being made here is that interpersonal relationships
can provide attachment experiences that can allow similar neuro-physiological changes to occur throughout life. In extreme cases oftrauma, such as neglect or abuse, the deeper structures of the brainmay be impaired to such a degree that improvement may be difficultto achieve. Even in these situations, however, the principles learnedfrom attachment research may perhaps still prove useful in organiz-ing an approach to helping people adapt to life’s stresses. In manycases of disorganized attachment and clinical dissociation, for exam -
ple, therapeutic relationships can facilitate effective movement to -
ward well-being and adaptive self-regulation.
19In less extreme cases,
the deeper structures of the brain may have developed well, but thestates of mind that have been engrained may be maladaptive. Forthese people, therapy may help to move the systems of their mindstoward more adaptive modes of processing information and regulat -
ing the flow of information. Sometimes specific techniques within a
psychotherapy relationship are needed to alter engrained patterns ofemotion dysregulation. The patient–psychotherapist relationship mayprovide a sense of proximity, a safe haven, and an internal model ofsecurity. These elements of an attachment relationship, within ther -
apy or other emotionally engaging relationships such as romance and
friendship, may possibly facilitate new orbitofrontal developmentand enhance the regulation of emotion throughout the lifespan.
An example of a five-year-old girl seen for “impulse control”Interpersonal Connection 285

problems in school illustrates the use of psychotherapy to enable the
mind to develop flexible self-regulation. A review of the child’s his -
tory revealed that she had severe visual problems, which had
remained undetected until she was three and a half years of age.Even after she received proper glasses and could see objects in focus,however, she continued to have “outbursts of emotion” and impul -
sivity at school. In the therapist’s office, it was clear that she did not
look to other people’s faces to “check in” with how they might beresponding to her. She seemed to have an impairment in the normalprocess of social referencing, which is usually evident during the firstyear of life.
20At school, she seemed oblivious to the reactions of her
teachers and her classmates. This social disconnection gave her theoutward appearance of being oppositional and perhaps of having abasic deficit in social cognition—the ability to perceive and processsocial signals. Face-to-face communication is one route by whichattunement and social referencing enable the emotional state of oneindividual to be perceived by another. Such abilities allow for emo-tionally contingent communication, which is at the developmentalheart of emotion regulation.
In therapy, the child was encouraged to look at the therapist’s
face. Her parents and teachers were counseled about the nature ofattachment, social referencing, and the use of face-to-face communi-cation in the development of emotion regulation. The impairment inher vision, now corrected, was offered as a working hypothesis forwhy this girl exhibited such social difficulties. Over a period of sev-eral months of intervention, she began to look more frequently atothers when she spoke. In play, she engaged more in identifyingdolls’ internal states, and their emotions became a more active partof the stories that unfolded in therapy. With the development ofthese capacities for facial perception, “theory of mind,” and socialreferencing, she began to engage more appropriately in social interac -
tions. The use of reflective dialogue—talking about feelings, thoughts,
memories, beliefs, and perceptions—in conjunction with the nonver -
bal face-to-face communication enabled her to develop previously
unstimulated abilities in her mind. Her ability to reg ulate her emo -
tions seemed to improve: Her explosions became less fre quent and
less intense, and her impulsive behavior diminished significantly. Onecould hypothesize that each of these developmental accomplishmentswas mediated by the interactive maturation of her orbitofrontal cor -
tex.
In theory, this therapeutic approach enabled this young girl to286 THE DEVELOPING MIND

use the nonverbal signals that she had generally missed because of
her visual difficulties. Other modalities that can allow two individu -
als to communicate their states of mind, such as hearing and touch,
are also important in communication during childhood. The use ofthis approach allowed this child to take in the vital information ofother people’s minds instead of living in isolation, where her frustra -
tion level was high and her behaviors appeared “impulsive” because
they were so independent of the signals and needs of others.
PATHWAYS OF EMOTIONAL GROWTH
This section integrates many ideas about memory, attachment, andemotion in exploring some insights gleaned from therapeutic workwith adults and children. These illustrations are offered not as scien -
tific data, but as clinical impressions that can serve to further our
discussion of the ways in which interpersonal experiences may shapethe developing mind across the lifespan.
Avoidance and Dismissing States of Mind
Although emotional relationships of all sorts can be healing and pro-mote healthy maturation, facilitating a movement toward an “earned”
secure/autonomous adult attachment status,
21at times the unique
configuration of psychotherapy is needed to catalyze this growth. ForMain and Goldwyn’s dismissing adult,
22without awareness of “what
life could be like,” promoting this growth may be quite a challengefor his therapist and his partner alike. On the one hand, the individ -
ual has the right to remain as he is; there are no definitions of abso -
lutely “normal” ways of relating that some “objective” therapist can
push onto others. However, isolation and emo tional distance take
their toll—within the person’s romantic relatio nship; within relation -
ships with others, including children; and within the self. His intense
emotions and enjoyment in life may be severely muted. Part of thisneutral emotionality may be attributable to the proposed parcellationof the sympathetic (accelerator) branch of the autonomic nervoussystem, which is responsible for heightened states of arousal. Hismindsight—the ability to sense the subjective mental life of others, orof himself—may also be severely restricted. The result is that hisbasic emotional needs are not met by anyone. However, theavoidantly attached individual does not believe this, because itInterpersonal Connection 287

appears to his adaptive self that his approach to survival has been
successful thus far. His private self remains highly underdevelopedand consciously unaware.
The avoidantly attached (dismissing) adult often comes to ther -
apy at the insistence of his securely or ambivalently attached roman -
tic partner. The partner feels that the relationship is too distant, too
emotionally barren, to tolerate. Ironically, the partner may have beeninitially attracted to the patient because of his “independence andautonomy—he didn’t have to rely on anyone.” This autonomy givesthe ambivalently attached mate a feeling at first that intrusion (thedreaded experience of the mate’s own childhood) need not be feared.As adult development progresses, however, the ambivalently attachedpartner may change and come to feel the need for more emotionalintimacy. The avoidantly attached partner is less likely to develop asquickly toward models of security, because he often lacks awarenessof internal pain or dissatisfaction with the relationship, which mightotherwise serve to motivate change.
Logical discussions, which are so natural for avoidantly attached
individuals, only go so far. Gentle and unintrusive attunements totheir shifts in states begin to open up new possibilities. These areright-hemisphere-to-right-hemisphere connections between a thera-pist and a patient. In addition to these affect attunements, activationof right-hemisphere processes can be helpful. For example, byencouraging imagery and other nonverbal processes (such as “draw-ing on the right side of the brain” art techniques,
23awareness of
bodily sensations, dance, and music), psychotherapy can facilitate theemergence of new ways of experiencing the self. Such self-awarenessoften facilitates the development of new ways of seeing the world,especially the subjective mental lives of others. This process may behelpful for many other individuals besides those who have a historyof avoidant attachment.
Guided imagery provides direct access to prelinguistic symbolic
imagination and processes driven by implicit memory. The resultscan be deeply moving, though often initially logically derided bysome avoidant/dismissing patients as “weird” and useless. As timegoes on, emotional states become accessible to these patients in theform of images that they can come to respect. These nonverbal,nonrational, right-sided processes begin to influence the patients’behavior and make them more aware of similar states in othersaround them. In some cases, psychotherapy can catalyze the devel -
opment of new conscious awareness of the self’s and others’ emo -288 THE DEVELOPING MIND

tional processes. As the attuned and resonating emotional commu -
nication within psychotherapy continues, new models of the self
and of the self with others can gradually begin to develop. Theseright-hemisphere models facilitate the promotion of emotional con -
nections with others. As such resonant experiences unfold, an inte -
grating process emerges and a more coherent narrative evolves,
coupled with a more complex and enriching sense of meaning inlife. The nature of such an integration will be explored in depth inthe next chapter.
In one case, a man who had a dismissing state of mind with
respect to attachment was introduced over time to the techniques ofguided imagery and asked to do the drawing exercises outlined inBetty Edwards’s art book.
24At first, this man seemed very reluctant
to consider these new experiences as important in any way. He hadcome to therapy at the insistence of his wife, who stated that he was“too cold and intellectual.” As the imagery continued over severalsessions, however, the emerging stories became more and more com-plex and compelling to him.
For the therapist, this imagery process revealed a previously
quiet, nonconscious, and dormant right hemisphere’s construction ofreality. It was filled with sensations, intense emotions, visual scenes,thematic struggles, and new perspectives on dilemmas of which theleft-sided individual was quite unaware. For example, he experiencedthe notion that he had better let his “wilting” marriage “blossom”by buying her roses when she didn’t expect them. He had never donesuch a thing as buying flowers for her without a particular “reason,”such as a birthday or anniversary. He got the roses simply because it“felt” right. He couldn’t explain it at the time, but he just followedhis gut instinct. His right hemisphere took his wife’s internal worldinto account, provided him with a metaphor for her needs, andenabled him to feel her feelings. Though there was no logic to theact, this man learned—from his own gut (literally, represented in theright orbitofrontal region)—the importance of letting another personfill him.
Over many months of therapy as he continued to allow his
innate right-hemisphere processes to “blossom,” he found himselfslowly becoming aware of new types of internal sensations. Hewould feel his body more in response to interactions with his wife;he also began to become aware of shifts in her facial expressions,and found himself responding more to these internal and externalemotional cues. What was particularly striking to him was that hisInterpersonal Connection 289

internal experiences seemed to shift. He stopped being so concerned
about goals and outcomes, and became more focused on the processof things, both at home and at work. These changes at first werequite subtle. Though this man would not openly admit it, he seemedto feel very vulnerable experiencing and expressing these new sensa -
tions. His life seemed to be opening up to a new mode of experienc -
ing both himself and his wife.
Ambivalence and Preoccupied States of Mind
For an individual with a history of ambivalent attachments, the
intrusion of parental emotional states onto those of the child has ledto an intense sense of vulnerability and loss of the self. As this indi -
vidual struggles to connect, she feels perpetually at risk of losing her
connections to others, or to herself. Retreating into chameleon-likeimitations of meeting others’ expectations is a learned, reflexive pub-lic adaptation to these intrusive assaults. In psychotherapy, this maylead to an attempt to be the “perfect patient.” As this individual triesto define herself, there may be patterns of withdrawal and approachsimilar to those in her childhood history of attachment, which leadto fluctuations in openness to being understood in psychotherapy.
As this person’s inner, private states of mind become slowly
accessible, the therapist must be ever vigilant to the critical micro-moments of interaction, where attunement is crucial. Responding tothe patient’s nonverbal signals, including tone of voice, facial expres-sions, eye gaze, and bodily motion, can reveal the otherwise hiddenshifts in states of mind. Resonating with these expressions of primaryemotions requires that the therapist feel the feelings, not merelyunderstand them conceptually. Resonance involves the alignment ofpsychobiological states between patient and therapist.
One aspect of this attunement is the recognition that everyone
seems to go through naturally oscillating cycles of internal versusexternal focus of connection. There are times when an individualneeds to have self-focus, perhaps reflecting the internal self-regulationof emotional states. Within moments, however, there may be anoticeable shift to an other-focus, in which external connections areused for dyadic self-regulation. These natural oscillations suggest theuse of modifications of the internal versus external constraints of theindividual’s system, in order to regulate the flow of states and self-organization. These ideas also remind us of the important conceptthat self-organization is a result of both internal individual processes290 THE DEVELOPING MIND

and dyadic processes. Another implication of such oscillations comes
from the findings on hemispheric specialization discussed in earlierchapters, in which the left hemisphere mediates approach states andthe right hemisphere facilitates states of withdrawal. The changingfocus of processing, mediated via a cycling of left- versus right-hemi -
sphere dominance and of external versus internal focus, may be a
part of what we sense when others have a cycling need for externalversus internal connection.
Missed opportunities for attunement and misattunements,
whether these occur in psychotherapy, parenting, or other emotionalrelationships, are unavoidable. Unless repair of these disruptions inattunement is undertaken, toxic senses of shame and humiliation canbecome serious blocks to interpersonal communication. These dreadedstates are not merely uncomfortable and disliked; they can feel like ablack hole, a bottomless pit of despair, in which the self is lost forwhat seems to be forever. Repair requires the recognition that a rup-ture has occurred in the attunement process, and then the realign-ment of states between the two individuals involved. The repair pro-cess is an interactive one, requiring the openness of both people inattempts to reconnect after a rupture.
The public self strives to avoid the dreaded states of shame and
humiliation; it scans the social environment for clues of connection, butis often unable to prevent the activation of these states. The anxietyaccompanying the emergence of these dreaded states into one’s con-sciousness can induce defensive adaptations. Fears of annihilation andof abandonment are the origins of the desperate withdrawal and anx -
ious approach common in ambivalently attached individuals. The
excessive parcellation of the parasympathetic “brakes,” proposed to beone adaptation to inconsistent and intrusive parenting, may make thesestates especially vulnerable to dysregulation. An adaptive, public selfmay emerge at these times to avoid the dreaded state by meeting theneeds of others. The adaptive defenses of such a public self vary greatlyand can include primitive modes, such as denial and the projection ofthe sense of disconnection onto other people or life events. In contrast,some individuals may utilize more mature approaches, such as seekingemotional connection with others or sublimating their painful experi -
ences into efforts to help others through professional work (for exam -
ple, teaching with an emphasis on supporting others’ self-esteem,
working in the government to establish laws protecting the rights ofchildren, or becoming a therapist and emphasizing the importance ofunderstanding others and respecting their individuality).Interpersonal Connection 291

From primitive, “nonproductive” defenses to mature, “socially
helpful” ones, an ambivalently attached (preoccupied) individualmay experience any of a wide range of adaptive modes within differ -
ing emotional and social contexts. The relative distance of a work
setting may permit sublimation to flourish; the close quarters of aromantic relationship or a parent–child relationship may periodicallyactivate an intense sense of intrusion or other forms of misattune -
ment, and yield a sudden emergence of the dreaded states of shame
and humiliation. In an effort to avoid these painful states, activationof more primitive modes of defense filled with fear, anger, and associ -
ated distortions of perceptions and misinterpretations of other’s
behavior may occur. These are moments of intense vulnerability andrisk for dyadic dysregulation.
Romantic Attachments and Interlocking States
Knowing the attachment histories of each member of a couple can beessential in clarifying how micromoments of misattunement can beblown up into major battles and interlocking, dysregulated dyadicstates of despair and distancing. Small changes in input, such as sub-tle shifts in the emotional expression of one member of the pair, canproduce large and rapid alterations in output in the nonlinear com-plex systems of each individual and of the dyad. These interlockingstates often have their origins in the attachment models of eachmember of the pair. In these situations, a historical rut has createdthe opposite of resonance of states of mind: a cascade of emotionalreflexes and defensive distortions, locking a romantic pair into aseries of mutually induced misunderstandings and misattunements.These repeated ruptures in connection are rarely repaired.
“Interlocking” in this context means that the separate states of
mind activated by these repeated patterns of induction reinforce thehistorical mental models of relationships and keep the partners con -
tinually reexperiencing lack of attunement, misattunements, and
repeated verification of the lessons learned from their own individualattachment histories. Interlocking states strengthen earlier maladap -
tive self-organizational pathways. They create a rigidity that prevents
the partners from joining together as a larger system capable of mov -
ing toward dyadic states of increasing complexity. At one extreme,
these ruts can be experienced as a sense of malaise or deadness,which each member of the pair may feel but may be unable to articu -292 THE DEVELOPING MIND

late; at the other extreme, these ruts may be filled with anxiety and a
sense of intrusiveness and uncertainty. To remain healthy, a dyadicsystem, like an individual, must find a balance between flexibilityand continuity in its perpetual move toward increasingly complexstates of existence. Couple therapy may sometimes be necessary forthe partners to recognize and then to alter these profoundly frustrat -
ing and deadening interlocking states.
In a dynamical sense, an ambivalent attachment can be seen as a
system that cannot dyadically regulate itself in a way allowing for ahealthy resonance between two individuals. The state of the child isintruded upon by that of the parent. There is often an inability to senseand respect the child’s oscillating need for internal versus external con -
nection. In this way, maximal complexity cannot be achieved by the
two as a dyadic system. Instead, a lesser degree of complexity must besettled for, because the parent rigidly defines the nature of the interac -
tion. There is no true collaborative communication. The dance ofattunement is severely constrained by the parent’s entangled preoccu-
pations with the past and inability to align states with the child.
In an avoidant attachment, maximal complexity is also not
attained because the states of the two individuals are so independentof each other. The parent’s dismissing approach leads to an emotion-ally disconnected form of communication, which minimizes the reso-nance between the parent and child. In this sense, the two systemsact independently of each other, and the dyad remains in a seg-mented and noncomplex mode of existence.
As these early models of attachment are later activated within
a couple’s relationship, the opportunity emerges to learn abouthow early experiences shaped implicit reality. Both partners’ pri -
vate selves are hungry and in pain, fearing annihilation or aban -
donment by the narcissistic intrusion of parental states that have
historically obliterated their own (as in ambivalent attachments) orhaving adapted to an emotional distance and sense of rejection (asin avoidant attachments). Nurturing their private selves requiresthat the members of the couple join together in supportivelyreflecting on how their public selves have struggled to adapt tothese intrusions, inconsistencies, and experiences of disconnectionwithout repair. Growth emerges as reflective and resonant dyadicstates become achieved within the attuned relationship. Such aprocess can then allow the couple to achieve more fulfilling andadaptive levels of dyadic self-organization.Interpersonal Connection 293

Disorganization and Unresolved States of Mind
Unresolved parental trauma or loss can lead to disorganized/disori -
ented attachment, which is a much more chaotic form of dyadic sys -
tem than either avoidant or ambivalent attachment.25For the person
who has experienced disorganized attachment, the experience ofparental fear or fear-inducing behavior has often been associatedwith the parent’s lack of resolution of trauma or loss. That is, theincoherence of the parent’s life narrative has been behaviorallyinjected into the child’s experience by way of the parent’s own distur -
bance in self-organization and the resultant dysregulated states and
disorienting actions. These parental behaviors, which are incompati -
ble with providing a sense of safety and cohesion, are “biological
paradoxes” and directly impair the developing child’s affect regula -
tion, shifts in states of mind, and integrative and narrative functions.
The result is that the child enters repeated chaotic states of mind.From a dynamical point of view, these can be considered “strangeattractor states”—neural net configurations that are widely distrib-uted throughout the system and that have become engrained,repeated states of dissociated and dysfunctional activation.
When a patient has a history of disorganized attachment, the
therapist is faced with the especially crucial challenge of providingthe essence of a secure attachment: a predictable emotional environ-ment in which the patient can learn to depend upon the therapist forregulating state shifts. The therapeutic relationship and the dyadicself-regulation subsequently become “internalized” through the devel-opment of a mental model of the self with the therapist and throughthe acquisition of new capacities for autonomous emotion regula -
tion. As we’ll discuss in the next chapter, achieving this new level of
self-organization is often facilitated by an integrating narrative pro -
cess which facilitates a deep sense of internal coherence.
26
TRAUMA AND GRIEF
In addition to the influence of repeated patterns of communication
within attachment relationships, specific overwhelming events mayproduce marked effects on the developing mind. Psychological trau -
ma can overwhelm affect regulation mechanisms, and various forms
of adaptation may be required to maintain equilibrium. The flood ofstress hormones can produce toxic effects on the development of294 THE DEVELOPING MIND

brain systems responsible for self-regulation. In this way, early,
severe, and chronic trauma may create impairments in a child’s abil -
ity to adapt to future stress.27The individual’s developmental stage at
the time of a trauma—be it loss of a loved one, an abusive experi -
ence (especially those involving a sense of betrayal), or the witnessing
of a violent event—markedly influences the adaptive responses avail -
able. In general, loss or trauma can have a negative impact on a
child’s expectations for the future, directly shape his anticipationalmodels and prospective memory, and disrupt his narrative process.These influences produce impairments to achieving self-regulationand integration of self-states, and in these ways damage the individ -
ual’s deepest sense of the self and the ability to regulate the flow of
internal states.
In some cases of engrained patterns of dysregulation—due to a
number of combinations of constitutional and experiential factors—psychiatric medications may be needed to help the brain achieve thecapacity to regulate the flow of states of mind, through direct bio-chemical effects that alter the synaptic strengths determining theinternal constraints of the system. A positive response to medicationsdoes not confirm some “genetic disorder.” For example, some of thesymptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder respond well to medica-tions. Furthermore, studies of laboratory animals that have experi-enced maternal deprivation and reveal subsequent behavioral distur-bances find that these animals respond well to selective serotoninreuptake inhibitors, but relapse when these medications are re -moved.
28It may be the case that certain individuals—whether
because of genetic factors, early traumatic experiences, or some com -
bination of inherited vulnerability and stressful environmental condi -
tions—have developed such maladaptive brain structures and self-
organizational capacities that intensive psychotherapy and/or medi -
cations are essential. It is important to keep in mind, however, that
the limbic regions of the brain (especially the orbitofrontal cortex)may continue to be open to further development throughout the life -
span, and thus remain open to experience-dependent maturational
processes. Psychotherapy can utilize this potential in helping facilitatethe further development of the mind.
If severe trauma occurs early in life, or if a form of divided
attention (such as entering a state of intense imagination or trance) isutilized during an overwhelming experience, explicit memory for thetraumatic experience(s) may be impaired. Intense and frightening ele -
ments of implicit memory will be encoded and may later be automat -Interpersonal Connection 295

ically reactivated, intruding on the traumatized individual’s internal
experience and external behaviors without the person’s conscioussense of recollection or knowledge of the source of these intrusions.
In the case of loss of a loved one, especially an attachment fig -
ure, the mind is forced to alter the structure of its internal working
models to adjust to the painful reality that the self can no longer seekproximity and gain comfort from the caregiver. Loss, especially earlyin childhood, can have a deep impact on the growing mind. Thedegree of impact may be related in part to how well the family canmeet the child’s ongoing attachment needs. The child’s developmentalstage at the time of the loss will also influence the nature of thegrieving process. As the child continues to develop, grieving mayneed to be revisited so that the new developmental capacities canprocess the loss. For both a child and an adult, dealing with losstakes time and a nurturing environment. John Bowlby’s view of thegrieving process is that the attachment models must be deeply alteredto take the loss into account.
29
Delayed or pathological grief can be seen as the impairment in the
ability to make such alterations within the attachment system. States ofmind continue to be activated in which connection to the actual attach-ment figure is expected. Prohibitions to sharing the grieving processmay result in impaired grief, as can be seen in families whose membersare unable to communicate about painful issues or to recognize the dif-ferent emotional needs of individuals within the family. If conflictualfeelings toward and mental models of a deceased attachment figurewere present, then grieving may also be difficult.
The effects of unresolved loss or trauma in relation to specific
overwhelming events can be powerfully disorganizing and often hid -
den from conscious awareness. At the most fundamental level, such a
lack of resolution involves disturbances in the flow of energy andinformation in the mind. As the mind emerges at the interface ofneurophysiological processes and interpersonal relationships, suchdisturbances can be seen within neural pathways and within dyadiccommunication. Knowledge of impaired resolution of grief or trau -
ma is crucial, given its devastating effects on the individual and its
potential to impair attachment with future offspring. Attachment dis -
turbances in the children of parents with lack of resolution result
directly from the impairments to contingent, collaborative communi -
cation. As suggested above, the flow of energy and information
between parent and child—the essence of attuned relationships—isdisturbed in cases of parental unresolved trauma or loss.296 THE DEVELOPING MIND

Prospective memory allows us to “remember the future.” In
memory-related terms, lack of resolution means that the mind has atendency to create repeated patterns of disorganizing states, oftenwithout conscious awareness of their origin. These states may be cre -
ated by sudden and unwanted activations of implicit elements of
memory, such as flashbacks of traumatic events or mental models ofa deceased attachment figure as if the figure were still alive. Theseactivations can seriously impair functioning, especially in the realmsof response flexibility, emotional modulation, and contingent com -
munication with others. Unresolved trauma or loss leaves the indi -
vidual with a deep sense of incoherence in autonoetic consciousness,
which tries to make sense of the past, organize the present, and chartout the future. This lack of resolution can produce lasting effectsthroughout the lifespan and influence self-organization across thegenerations.
Making the connection within psychotherapy between these
aspects of memory and past experiences allows patients to under-stand the origins of their disturbances. Such reflections must takeplace within the therapeutic attachment setting, which allows themind to experience intensely dysregulated states and learn—dyadically at first—how to tolerate them, then to reflect on theirnature, and eventually to regulate them in a more adaptive manner.Much of this emotional processing is in its essence nonverbal and isprobably mediated via right-hemisphere processes (both those withinthe patient and those between patient and therapist).
Bringing conscious reflection to such unresolved reactivations
permits the consolidation process of explicit memory to becomeinvolved and traumatic experiences to be integrated within autobio -
graphical narrative. As we’ll explore in the next chapter, this process
may allow for cooperative processing in both hemispheres of whatmay have been only unilateral representations. The attuned reso -
nant relationship with the therapist allows patients to make left-
hemisphere, verbally mediated, interpreter-driven sense out of theirright-hemisphere autobiographical representations. This integrativeprocess probably has direct effects on the right hemisphere’s capacityto regulate primary emotional states. The patient’s mind is preparedfor such a process by the development of a secure attachment withthe therapist. Furthermore, the elaboration of autonoetic conscious -
ness permits patients to reflect on the past, understand the present,
and help actively shape the future. Such mentalizing reflective dia -
logue is also a fundamental component of secure attachments. Indi -Interpersonal Connection 297

viduals with histories of disorganized attachments can thus become
freed from the “prison of the present,” in which they were repeatedlytrapped when they had no words to reflect on their rapidly envelop -
ing and terrifying states of mind.
REFLECTIONS: EMOTIONAL RELATIONSHIPS
AND THE JOINING OF MINDS
We all need contingent communication. Our history of being close
with others, having affective attunements and resonating states ofmind, allows us to connect with others and to have a sense of coher -
ence within our own internal processes. Adaptations to patterns of
misattunements without repair, and to the subsequent dreaded statesof shame and humiliation, shape our subjective experience of self,others, and the world. These patterns of relationships can lead to alarge disparity between our adaptive, public selves and our inner, pri-vate selves. The attachment models that reflect these early, pre-explicit-memory experiences influence our emotions and their regula-tion, response flexibility, consciousness, self-knowledge, narrative,and openness to and drive toward interpersonal intimacy.
At times, engrained dysfunctional patterns of self-organization
may require the specialized interpersonal relationship of psychothera-py to alter the emotion dysregulation that has come to be the sourceof pain in some individuals’ lives. Psychotherapy establishes a safeenvironment in which present and past experiences can be explored.A therapist and a patient enter into a resonance of states of mind,which allows for the creation of a co-regulating dyadic system. Thissystem is able to emerge in increasingly complex dyadic states bymeans of the attunement between the two individuals. The patient’ssubtle nonverbal expressions of her state of mind are perceived bythe therapist and responded to with a shift in the therapist’s ownstate, not just with words. In this way, there is a direct resonancebetween the primary emotional, psychobiological state of the patientand that of the therapist. These nonverbal expressions are mediatedby the right hemisphere of one person and then perceived by theright hemisphere of the other. In this way, the essential nonverbalaspect of psychotherapy, and perhaps all emotional relationships, can
be conceived a s a right-hemisphere-to-right-hemisphere resonance
between two individuals.
The left hemispheres of both members of the dyad are also298 THE DEVELOPING MIND

important and active in the verbal exchanges and logical reflections
on the patient’s present life, past history, and the therapy experienceitself. The left hemisphere’s interpreter function attempts to “makesense” of experiences and therefore can be seen as a motivationalforce in the narrative process. As we’ll explore more fully in the nextchapter, coherent autobiographical narratives—a primary focus oftherapy of all sorts—probably involve a resonance of left- and right-hemisphere processes in both the teller and the listener. In this way,the joint construction of narratives reflects the interhemispheric reso -
nance within both members of the therapeutic relationship.
The flow of states within the dyadic system is allowed to achieve
increasing degrees of complexity as the individuals themselvesachieve increasingly coherent states of interhemispheric resonance.Such a state is achieved via the right-to-right and left-to-leftattunements that emerge from the nonverbal and verbal communica -
tion between patient and therapist. The emergent sense of flow, ofconnection, between two individuals in such a state of resonance is
deeply compelling.
As self-states emerge over time, the mind has the challenge of
integrating these relatively autonomous processes into a coherentwhole. Psychotherapy can catalyze the development of such a coreintegrative process by facilitating dyadic states of resonance: righthemisphere to right hemisphere, left hemisphere to left hemisphere.In such a process, the mind of the patient (and that of the therapist)can become immersed in primary emotional states while simulta-neously focusing on reflective narrative explorations. Such affectattunement and reflective dialogue catalyze an internal, bilateralform of resonance within each member of the dyad. As will beexplored in the next chapter, this form of resonance may be at thecore of an integrating process that permits emotion regulation acrosstime and across self-states. It is from this state of cooperative activa -
tion that coherent narratives emerge, and through this process that
the mind is able to achieve maximal complexity and thus stable self-organization.
Psychotherapy is a complex process. The brain can be ravaged
by interactions between genetically influenced mental storms andexperiential histories of family strife. Both inherited disturbances andadaptations to traumatic experiences can have complex effects on theneurophysiologically constructed reality of our subjective lives. Ourminds are complex systems constrained in their activity by neuronalconnections, which are determined by both constitution and experi -Interpersonal Connection 299

ence. Different therapeutic tools, including medications and specific
psychotherapeutic techniques, may be useful at various times in help -
ing patients achieve self-organization and live balanced and enriching
lives. Whatever tools or techniques are used, the relationshipbetween patient and therapist requires a deep commitment on thetherapist’s part to understanding and resonating with the patient’sexperience. The therapist must always keep in mind that interper -
sonal experience shapes brain structure and function, from which the
mind emerges.
It is a challenge, and a profound privilege, to keep an objective
focus on a patient’s emotional needs while at the same time allowingoneself as the therapist to join with the patient’s evolving states ofmind. This resonance of states bonds patient and therapist. By join -
ing, they become part of a larger system that develops its own self-
organizational processes and coherent life history. In many ways,therapy reflects the challenge of all human relationships: understand-ing and accepting people as they are, and yet nurturing further inte-gration and growth. These connections within ourselves and withothers are the essence of living vital lives and remaining open to alllayers of our own emerging experiences.300 THE DEVELOPING MIND

THE DEVELOPING MINDIntegration
CHAPTER 9
/fl2rt
Integration
One of the mind’s most robust features is its capacity to interconnect
a range of processes within its present activity, as well as its function-ing across time. Researchers studying diverse aspects of mental life—from social psychology to the neurosciences—have used the term“integration” to refer to the collaborative, linking functions thatcoordinate various levels of processes within the mind and betweenpeople. This chapter explores various ways in which integration canbe understood as a fundamental aspect of interpersonal experienceand the developing mind.
NEURAL INTEGRATION
Within the brain itself, complex functions emerge from the coordina -
tion of neural activity in a range of circuits. Those regions that
receive input and send output to widely distributed areas of the brainplay an important role in neural integration. The limbic regions andassociational circuits, especially the prefrontal areas such as theorbitofrontal cortex, serve such a coordinating function. From thisneurobiological perspective, Tucker, Luu, and Pribram have statedthat
the theoretical challenge at the neural level is to go beyond label -
ing the functions of the frontal lobe to formulate the key neuro -
physiological mechanisms. These mechanisms link the operations
of frontal cortex to the multiple systems of the brain’s control hier -
301

archy, ranging from the control of arousal by brain-stem projec -
tion systems to the control of memory by reentrant corticolimbic
interactions. When sufficiently understood, these mechanisms mustbe found to regulate not only physiology of neural tissue, but therepresentation and maintenance of the self.”
1
In this manner, neural integration is fundamental to self-organi -
zation, and indeed to the capacity of the brain to create a sense of
self. Tucker and colleagues further suggest that integration within thebrain may consist of at least three forms, which focus on particularaspects of anatomic circuits: “vertical,” “dorsal–ventral,” and “lat -
eral.”
2Vertical integration is the integration of the “lower” functions
of the brainstem and limbic regions with the “higher” operations ofthe frontal neocortex such as cognitive and motor planning. In verti -
cal integration, somewhat isolated processes at various layers of
complexity or “order” are coordinated into a functional system. Thisvertical process is common throughout the brain.
Dorsal–ventral integration focuses on the dual origins of the
frontal cortex from the archicortical and paleocortical regions of theparalimbic cortex. As we’ve seen in Chapter 5, these differencesbegin in the embryo and may stem from the asymmetry in whatTrevarthen has called the “intrinsic motive formation.”
3Each hemi-
sphere has a dominant pathway: right with dorsal and left with ven-tral. Each circuit or “stream” mediates differential forms of motiva-tional processes and motor control, and creates differentrepresentational processes on either side of the brain. As suggestedearlier, the finding of less hemispheric specialization in women maybe proposed to be partly due to the participation of both dorsal andventral circuits in each hemisphere. Dorsal–ventral integration wouldallow for less lateralization of the more complex representationalprocesses originating from each side of the brain.
Lateral integration is the coordination of functions of the cir -
cuits at a similar level of complexity or order. Coordinating percep -
tual processes across sensory modalities, such as bringing together
vision with tactile and auditory perceptions, to create a “whole pic -
ture” of an experience is an example of lateral integration. This inte -
gration may be mediated by associational neurons, which link distinct
systems. When lateral integration connects the complex repre senta -
tional processes of one hemisphere to another, the term “bilateral” or
“interhemispheric” integration can be used. The associational neu-
rons that link various anatomically and functionally distinct regions302 THE DEVELOPING MIND

on either side of the brain may be the means by which the coordina -
tion of interhemispheric information processing occurs. According to
Trevarthen, the cerebral commissures (the corpus callosum and theanterior commissures) are “the only pathway through which thehigher functions of perception and cognition, learning and voluntarymotor coordination can be unified”; this is achieved through a sort -
ing process, which he proposes “creates complementary sets of asso -
ciative links between the cortical maps of various sensory and motor
functions.”
4In this form of lateral integration, the isolated functions
of each hemisphere can be coordinated into a functionally linked sys -
tem.
The fact that the “greatest integration of sensory, motor, and
evaluative information may occur in the primitive paralimbic cortex”has led Tucker and colleagues to suggest that these three forms ofintegration, each of which involves aspects of this region, may actu -
ally be interdependent.
5For example, vertical integration is revealed
in the capacity of the right hemisphere (especially the paralimbicorbitofrontal cortex) to have predominant control over certain“lower” functions, such as the regulation and representation ofbodily function as mediated via the autonomic nervous system. Lat-eral integration is revealed within REM sleep and encoding–retrievalprocesses, in which left and right orbitofrontal cortices are involvedin representational integration in dreams and the consolidation ofmemory. At a minimum, then, the orbitofrontal cortex coordinatesvertical and lateral integration. Future studies will need to explorewhether and how these coordinating regions play a role in dorsal–ventral integration on one or both sides of the brain.
Another illustration of how distinct regions of the brain may be
coordinated into integrated circuits is in the connections of frontalcortex to the basal ganglia. As outlined by Steven Wise and col -
leagues, this integrated system functions to guide behavior by assess -
ing a variety of inputs.
6In their view, the basal ganglia mediate rule-
guided behavior, whereas the frontal cortex provides alternatives thatincorporate context-dependent processing. This can also be seen asan example of the integration of implicit encoding in the basal gan -
glia and explicit processing in the frontal cortex. This frontal cortex–
basal ganglia system serves to allow the individual to reject maladap -
tive rules that are no longer useful in the currently assessed situation.
The integrated functioning of such a system has powerful implica -
tions for the acquisition and application of new behavioral
responses. This integration of “motor” areas (basal ganglia) withIntegration 303

those thought of as responsible for more abstract “planning” (frontal
lobes) may be an adaptive way through evolution that our brainshave come to integrate a wide array of systems.
7This view is consis -
tent with our earlier discussions of the orbitofrontal cortex’s role in
mediating response flexibility, the altering of responses based onunexpected or changing conditions.
8
At an even more basic level of neurobiology, we can examine the
notion of how neurons integrate their functioning within neural net -
works to produce neural net activation profiles. As we’ve seen, the
brain learns from experience through the shaping of patterns ofneuronal firing that create these networks. van Ooyen and van Pelthave stated,
As a result of these activity-dependent processes, a reciprocal influ -
ence exists between the formation of neuronal form and synaptic
connectivity on the one hand, and neuronal and network activityon the other hand. A given network may generate activity patternswhich modify the organization of the network, leading to alteredactivity patterns which further modify structural or functionalcharacteristics, and so on . . . the realization is growing that elec-trical activity and neurotransmitters are not only involved in infor-mation coding, but also play an important role in shapingneuronal networks in which they operate.
9
In this manner, basic neuronal connectivity creates representational
abilities and also directly influences the nature of the network activ-ity itself. What this means is that a process that links distinct circuitsnot only creates a new form of information processing, but alsoestablishes a more complex, integrated network that influences itsown capacities. Integrated systems, by virtue of their coordinatedactivities, establish their own characteristic features; the whole isgreater than merely the sum of the individual parts. As we’ll see,such neural integration becomes a central process that is directlyrelated to self-regulation.
The fundamental role of complexity has helped to clarify the
development and functioning of neural networks and has pointed tothe central role of “spatiotemporal integration.”
10Various levels of
hierarchical systems—from sets of neurons to the interaction of com -
plex circuits—involve space–time patterns of neuronal activity. What
this suggests is that the brain is capable of representing, in themoment, patterns of activity in which direct influences from the past304 THE DEVELOPING MIND

are encoded. As we’ve discussed, the organization of memory and
the brain’s function as an anticipation machine enable it to “repre -
sent the future.” Such anticipatory mechanisms directly shape the
ways in which linkages may be made across various processes andacross time.
For example, the ways in which neural circuits anticipate experi -
ence may help us understand how the mind develops through a
recursive set of interactions. As representational processes anticipateexperience, they also seek particular forms of interactions to matchtheir expectations. In this way, the “bias” of a system leads it to per -
ceive, process, and act in a particular manner. The outcome of this
bias is to reinforce the very features creating the system’s bias. Asdevelopment evolves, the circuits involved become more differenti -
ated and more elaborately engrained in an integrated system that
continues to support its own characteristics. These recursive andanticipatory features of development may be at the core of how thedorsal and ventral circuits influence the unfolding of the lateral-ization in hemispheric functioning. Infant studies suggest that tradi-tional theories attempting to understand hemispheric lateralizationand brain asymmetry may be looking at the problem from a limitedend-product perspective. According to Trevarthen, a clearer under-standing of the developmental origins of these different systems maybe achieved by examining how the anticipation of encounters withthe world influences each hemisphere in quite distinct ways. AsTrevarthen explains, “With a change of theory that recognizes thepriority of intrinsic motor planning and prospective motor imageryin cognition, and that also takes into account the expression of emo -
tional states related to anticipatory self-regulation and the subject’s
evaluation of the consequences of intended action, a different per -
spective on cerebral asymmetry of awareness and memory can be
proposed, one that seeks the origins in cerebral activities that antici -
pate experience.”
11This anticipation can be seen as emanating from
a form of spatiotemporal integration: The mind creates complex rep -
resentations as a process between perception (input) and action (out -
put) in an effort to interact with an environment that changes across
time and space. The value of such a representational process is that itallows the individual to anticipate the next moment in time and inthis way to act in a more adaptive manner, enhancing the chance forsurvival. Spatiotemporal integration may therefore be a fundamentalfeature of how the human mind has evolved.Integration 305

DEVELOPMENT AND
INTEGRATIVE PROCESSES
How do integrative processes develop within the individual? What are
the neural mechanisms that allow integration to occur? How do expe -
riential and genetic factors transact in the development of integrative
processes? One approach to answering these questions may be to viewthe foundation of the mind as emanating from patterns in the flow ofenergy and information. Experience, as we’ve discussed repeatedly,activates neurons in such a manner that genes may become expressedand may produce alterations in neuronal connectivity. Information istransferred by the assembly of neural circuits into recruited clusters ofactivation that become functionally linked. This information transferitself creates new representations and mental states. When new ele -
ments of informational processing are recruited into a new state of the
system, this linkage of differentiated elements into a functional wholeoccurs and is the essence of integration. Such a flexible process, aswe’ve seen, becomes disrupted in childhood trauma and in suboptimalattachment experiences. But normal development appears to move inthe direction of more differentiated and integrated states. How doesthis integration happen in the brain?
The capacity to link a widely distributed array of neural pro-
cesses can be proposed to be mediated by neuronal fibers that serveto interconnect anatomically and functionally distributed regions ofthe brain. In this manner, differentiated information processingmodes, such as different sensory modalities, can become functionallylinked.
12This basic neuronal process may also help us to understand,
for example, how highly engrained mental states, such as those offear and shame, may become, or fail to become, integrated withinthe flow of the system’s complex states. For example, we’ve seen thatcertain suboptimal attachment experiences produce multiple, inco -
herent working models of attachment and engrained and inflexible
states of mind that remain unintegrated across time within special -
ized and potentially dysfunctional self-states. We can propose that
the creation of new neuronal linkages, then, allows the internal con -
straints of the dynamical system of the brain to change. New inter -
connecting neuronal linkages may thus serve to integrate not only
anatomically independent processes, but functionally isolated onessuch as engrained mental states that have produced inflexibility andimpairments in the system’s capacity to adapt.
Central to this integration is emotion. As we’ve discussed earlier,306 THE DEVELOPING MIND

emotion is inherently an integrative function that links internal pro -
cesses and individuals together. This view reinforces the central role
of emotion in self-regulation and in communication within interper -
sonal relationships. As the neurologist Antonio Damasio notes:
It would not be possible to discuss the integrative aspects of brain
function without considering the operations that arise in large-scale neural systems; and it would be unreasonable not to singleout emotion among the critical integrative components arising inthat level. Yet, throughout the twentieth century, the integratedbrain and mind have often been discussed with hardly anyacknowledgment that emotion does exist, let alone that it is animportant function and that understanding its neural underpin -
nings is of great advantage.
13
Fortunately, we are in a time of great strides in examining the neuro -
biology and interpersonal nature of emotion.
Emotionally meaningful events can enable continued learning
from experience throughout the lifespan. Such learning may be seenas, in effect, the ongoing development of the brain. Experience playsa primary role in stimulating new neuronal connections in bothmemory and developmental processes. Findings from neurobiologysuggest that such development may continue to some degreethroughout the lifespan.
14In particular, the neural circuitry facilitat-
ing integration may also continue to develop throughout life. Thoseneurons that serve to coordinate information from distributedregions may continue to develop perhaps with genetic programming,with the inherent mechanisms of aging, and with specific forms ofexperience. For example, in studying the progressively increasingmyelination across the lifespan in the hippocampal pathways thatinterconnect widely distributed regions, Francine Benes has indicated:
Growth and development of regions in the human brain occur not
only in childhood but also much later during adolescent and adultyears. . . . Myelination represents one of the final stages inneuronal maturation where cells acquire a fatty lipid sheatharound their axons, a change that increases the propagation ofelectrical signals from the neuronal cell body to terminal areas. . . .These axons might well play a role in the integration of emotionalbehaviors with cognitive processes, a putative function of thelimbic cortex. . . . Therefore the functions influenced by this ongo -
ing myelination may themselves “grow” and mature throughout
adult life.
15Integration 307

In this manner, experiences and innate developmental processes may
allow our neural capacity to integrate an array of processes to con -
tinue to develop throughout our lives. The mechanism of this differ -
entiation of circuits, as we’ve discussed earlier, may involve a range
of processes from the growth of axons into widely distributedregions of the brain, the establishment of new synaptic connections,and the increased conductance of nerve fibers via their increasedmyelination. These mechanisms may be at work in the dramatic mat -
uration of the corpus callosum during the first decade of life, and
perhaps, we can propose, in its possible ongoing developmentthroughout life. Future studies may enable us to investigate howexperience enhances or hinders the development of these integratingneural processes.
The movement toward such integrating neural connections is
consistent with complexity theory: highly differentiated and function -
ally linked subsystems maximize the complexity achievable by thesystem. In this manner, it may be a natural developmental outcome
for increasing levels of differentiation and integration to occur acrossthe lifespan. One outcome of such a process for some individuals, wecan imagine, might be the development of wisdom with age: Thecapacity to “see the forest for the trees” may emerge from an inte-grative capacity to focus on patterns over time and across situationsrather than on the details of particular events. Disturbances in men-tal health, as we’ve discussed, may emanate from recursive processesthat impair this natural movement toward integration by fixing thesystem’s flow in the maladaptive direction of excessive rigidity orchaos. Fixed constraints to the system, either internal or external,may create an inflexible state for the individual. Normal develop -
ment may thus continue to promote integration throughout life if it
is unimpaired by elements of our constitution, experiential history, orongoing interpersonal relationships.
Internal processes and interpersonal relationships that entail sub -
component differentiation and intercomponent integration can be
proposed as those that promote healthy, ongoing development withinand between individuals. Consider the musical analogy of a choir. Atone extreme each individual sings his or her own song totally inde -
pendently of the others. The ensuing cacophony occurs as a result of
the lack of clustering of the individuals into a functional whole.There would be no cohesion, and the resultant sounds over timewould be incoherent. Such a random set of isolated, though differen -
tiated, interactions does little to move the system toward complexity.308 THE DEVELOPING MIND

But at the other extreme, the matching of each singer’s voice to those
of the others produces an amplification of the mirrored sounds.While the tune may be pleasing (and loud), it does little to maximizethe complexity possible, if differentiated singers were to join togetherin a resonant integrational process. Neither independence nor mim -
icry creates complexity. With each singer having well-developed indi -
vidual skills, integration allows them to contribute to a functional
whole that has continuity and regularity on the one hand, and yetflexibility and spontaneity on the other. As we’ve seen, such a blendallows for the movement toward maximal complexity within theindividual mind and between minds. At the heart of such integrationis emotion and the flow of energy and information through the sys -
tem. Such a dynamic condition achieves stability as the system moves
forward in time through the various states of activity. These recipro -
cal and cooperative processes may characterize the healthy ongoing
development of the individual mind, dyadic relationships, and nur-turing communities. The blend of individual differentiation andinterpersonal integration allows each of us to move forward in lifewith our minds forever developing in a complex biological interde-pendence of our social and inner worlds.
INTEGRATION OF MINDS
The concept of integration has also been applied to mental activity ata more macroscopic level, in both the intraindividual and inter -
individual domains. For example, several authors use the concept of
intraindividual integration to refer to various ways in which develop -
mental achievements and processes interrelate at one time or across
the lifespan.
16Interindividual integration focuses on the relationships
between children and their caregivers and peers. From this psycho -
logical perspective, various layers of integration can be seen as inter -
dependent, influencing one another in the moment and affecting the
developmental trajectory of the child within a social world.
Integration can also help us understand the notion of “selves”
within a given individual. For some adults, their developmental pathhas led to a coherent set of interactions with the world—interactionsthat have enabled the emergence of various self-states, which per -
form their functions with relatively minimal conflict among them -
selves. Such individuals may live a comparatively carefree existence,
without internal tumult or impairment in functioning. Part of theIntegration 309

developmental challenge of normal adolescence, as identified by
Susan Harter and her colleagues, is the resolution of potential con -
flicts among various adaptive “selves” defined by specific social rela -
tionship role contexts.17The teen years bring a significant change in
metacognitive capacity, with the new ability to reflect on one’s ownexistence in more complex and integrative ways than were possibleat earlier stages of life. Adolescents become aware of conflictual rolepatterns in their early teens, but often only develop the capacity toresolve tensions about these roles in later adolescence. This lag timebetween the onset of awareness and the capacity for resolution maybe a characteristic feature of normal adolescent development. As theneed for various roles is accepted and teenagers find ways to resolvepotential conflicts within their experiences with peers and parents, anintegration of selves across time and role relationships becomes pos -
sible. This is the essence of the integrative capacity to achieve coher -
ence of the self.
Not all individuals are able to find emotional well-being in inte-
grating multiple self-states into a coherent experience of the self. Fromearly in development, the resolution of multiple models of attachmentmay be one of the determinants of later developmental outcome. Par-ticular forms of self-states may have been constructed in relationship todifferent caregivers, resulting in potentially conflictual conditions.Within a given state, there may be cohesive functioning; across theseself-states, however, spatiotemporal integration may not be possible,given the inherent incompatibility of mental models, drives, and modesof emotion regulation. Experiences within relationships and the waysin which the mind comes to create a coherent perspective, access toinformation, and models of such experiences are important variables indetermining emotional resilience or vulnerability. In other words, anintegrative process across self-states may be essential in the acquisitionof well-being. The capacity for such internal integration may be inti -
mately related to interpersonal experience—derived initially from
attachment relationships, and later shaped by individuals’ ongoinginvolvement with parents, teachers, and peers.
We can study various layers of integration, such as the coordina -
tion of elements of a given perceptual process into a hierarchy of
functioning: sensory input, pattern analysis, and the creation of com -
plex visual representations. We can also study the ways in which
more widely distributed neural circuits interact to form a coherentprocess of increasingly complex processing, such as in the creation ofmultimodal representations that include perceptual and linguistic310 THE DEVELOPING MIND

components. Such processes may involve the vertical, dorsal–ventral,
and lateral domains of integration discussed above. For example, thecombination of linguistic and nonverbal prosodic elements of speechrequires the bilateral integration of representational processes.
18The
brain is normally integrating information processing across widelydistributed circuits at any given moment in time, or in a “syn -
chronic” fashion. As Ciompi has suggested, emotion may be essential
in such an integrative process at a given time (“synchronic”), as wellas across time (“diachronic”).
19
What does integration at a given time or across time look like?
We can propose the following possibilities. Synchronic integrationinvolves the elements discussed in Chapter 6, which create a cohesivemental state. Various aspects of neural activity are clustered togetherwithin a functional state of mind as a part of vertical, dorsal–ventral,and lateral integration in a given moment in time. At another level,we can suggest that as the individual’s states of mind flow acrosstime, diachronic integration somehow “links” these together in amanner that facilitates flexible and adaptive functioning. This is anexample of spatiotemporal integration. Such cross-time integrationserves as a mechanism of self-regulation, in that it serves to organizethe flow of states. In Chapter 6, we have focused primarily on howcomplex systems can function as a cohesive state—a form ofsynchronic integration as we are defining it here. In this chapter, wewill explore ways in which the mind may create coherence acrosstime through diachronic integration. As time itself flows, it is in factdifficult to distinguish between cohesion in the moment and coher -
ence across time. In the physical world, when does a “moment”
actually end? The complex system of the brain, however, has thecapacity for abrupt shifts in state that more clearly define the neuraledges of time. Though time itself may have no clear boundaries,these neural shifts give a functional reality to the temporal contrastsbetween states. In this manner, cohesion exists within a given state ofmind as a form of synchronic integration. The recursive nature ofsystems establishes a continuity in a given self-state across time. As agiven state changes, it goes through a phase transition involving thetemporary disorganization and then reorganization of the system’sstate. In contrast to cohesion of a given self-state, coherence is cre -
ated across states of mind as a form of diachronic integration. As
we’ll discuss, such abilities to create coherence can be proposed to bea function of the individual’s experiential history, which enables theacquisition of a core integrative process.Integration 311

ATTACHMENT AND INTEGRATION
Main and Goldwyn have suggested that the way adults can flexibly
access information about childhood and reflect upon such informa -
tion in a coherent manner determines their likelihood of raising
securely attached children.20The abilities to reflect upon one’s own
childhood history, to conceptualize the mental states of one’s parents,and to describe the impact of these experiences on personal develop -
ment are the essential elements of coherent adult attachment narra -
tives. Moreover, the capacity to reflect on the role of mental states in
determining human behavior is associated with the capacity to pro -
vide sensitive and nurturing parenting. Fonagy and Target have sug -
gested that this reflective function is more than the ability to intro -
spect; it directly influences a self-organizational process within the
individual.
21We can extend this idea to suggest that the reflective
function also enables the parent to facilitate the self-organizationaldevelopment of the child. We will explore how the coherent organi-zation of the mind depends upon an integrative process that enablessuch reflective processes to occur. As we’ll see, integrative coherencewithin the individual may early in life depend upon, and later facili-tate, interpersonal connections that foster the development of emo-tional well-being.
The coherence of one’s own states of mind permits a form of
relationship with others—especially one’s own children, friends, orintimate partners—that fosters integration, reflective processes, andemotional well-being within the relationship and within the emergingminds of each person. In other words, internal integration allows forvital interpersonal connections.
Attachment studies suggest that coherence can be observed and
measured within autobiographical narrative reflections. As Pearsonand colleagues have stated, “congruity, unity and free-flowing con -
nections” in such narratives are central features revealing what is
thought to be “coherence of mind” in the AAI studies.
22The inter -
generational transmission of suboptimal parenting within insecure
attachments is thought to be due to the persistence of incoherentadult stances toward attachment. Given the view that insecureattachment can be considered a risk factor for future difficulties,understanding the nature of coherence becomes a pressing concernfor parents and mental health professionals interested in early inter -
vention and preventative measures.
What is incoherence of mind, and how can it be transformed312 THE DEVELOPING MIND

into coherence? Incongruity, fragmentation, and restricted flow of
information are the elements of such incoherence, as seen withinthe AAI narratives of individuals who are classified as dismissing,preoccupied, and unresolved/disoriented. Studies of those individu -
als who appear to have had suboptimal attachment histories but
receive “earned” secure/autonomous AAI classifications in theMain and Goldwyn system
23reveal that their parenting, even under
stressful conditions, is sensitive and nurturing.24“Earned” secure/
autonomous status is most often achieved through supportive per -
sonal or therapeutic relationships (for example, marriage or psy -
chotherapy). The implication of these findings is that even with
difficult past childhood experiences, the mind is capable of achiev -
ing an integrated perspective—one that is coherent and that per -
mits parenting behavior to be sensitive and empathic. If integration
is achieved, the trend toward transmission of insecure forms ofattachment to the next generation can be prevented. Achievingcoherence of mind thus becomes a central goal for creating emo-tional well-being in both oneself and one’s offspring. As we’ll see,such integration involves internal processes and their facilitation byinterpersonal interactions.
Integration can be proposed to be a key process that influences
the trajectory of developmental pathways toward resilience ortoward vulnerability. For example, one factor in the adolescent onsetof certain psychiatric disturbances, such as mood, eating, or identitydisorders, may be the challenge of the need for integration.
25Those
who are not fortunate enough to achieve this sense of coherence maylive with adaptive selves whose goals are incompatible with eachother; in such individuals, mental modules and the information theyprocess create anxiety and conflict if shared across modalities. Forthese people, emotional imbalance may be due to the inability tointegrate the self diachronically into a coherent whole. For example,an individual who has been humiliated repeatedly as a child may findrejection as an adolescent or adult extremely disorganizing. The self-state that needs affiliation and acceptance from others is in directopposition to the need to gain status and rise, say, in the school set -
ting or the corporate world, where being in a position of authority
inevitably involves evoking the displeasure of others. Such an indi -
vidual may find her career hampered by such a conflict in needs.
Most people experience some degree of conflict between inner desiresand outer realities. But at times these desires are a part of fairly dis -
tinct states of mind, which can remain out of the awareness of manyIntegration 313

individuals. Even without awareness, the mind may experience the
emotional imbalance of such conflicts as the onset of depression,anxiety, uncontrolled rage, a feeling of meaninglessness and discon -
nection (as in a “false self”), loss of motivation, and interpersonal
difficulties. Harter and coworkers’ studies suggest that the more ado -
lescents experience their roles as “false” and not “authentic,” the
more turmoil they feel.
26Social contexts that force individuals to
adapt via self-states that are not reflective of their own experiences,mental states, and needs may place these persons at higher risk ofdeveloping emotional disorders.
Attachment relationships may therefore serve as catalysts of risk
or resilience, to the extent that they facilitate the flow of inauthenticversus authentic states within interactions with others. We can pro -
pose that insecure attachments confer vulnerability because they fail to
offer children interpersonal experiences that foster an integrative self-
organizational process. Later relationships with peers and teachers
can also make a difference; interpersonal influences on the self-statesthat emerge to adapt to social contexts directly shape mental health.Though early attachment experiences have been shown to have adirect influence on social competence, sense of autonomy, ego resil-ience, and peer acceptance, it seems clear that dyadic relationshipsbeyond those with early caregivers may continue to influence thedevelopment of regulatory capacities.
27As Cicchetti and Rogosch
have noted, resilience is not a trait or some fixed achievement, but isan emergent state function dependent upon self-organizational pro-cesses and continued interdependence within social connections.
28
The capacity for self-integration, like the processes of the mind
itself, is continually created by an interaction of internal neuro -
physiological processes and interpersonal relationships. Resilience
and emotional well-being are fundamental mental processes thatemerge as the mind integrates the flow of energy and informationacross time and between minds.
As Ogawa and colleagues have paraphrased the work of Loevin -
ger, “Integration is not a function of the self, it is what the self is.”
29
They go on to state, “Therefore, the failure to integrate salient expe -
rience represents profound distortion in the self system. When salient
experience must be unnoticed, disallowed, unacknowledged, or for -
gotten, the result is incoherence in the self structure. Interconnections
among experiences cannot be made, and the resulting gaps in per -
sonal history compromise both the complexity and the integrity of
the self.”30314 THE DEVELOPING MIND

THE INTEGRATING SELF
Creating Coherence
The integrating mind attempts to create a sense of coherence
among multiple selves across time and across contexts. We havediscussed in Chapter 6 how the inherent features of computation,complexity, and connectionism create a property of cohesion with -
in a state of mind in a given slice of time. Self-states have a
repeating pattern of cohesive activity, which lends a sense of his -
torical continuity to their existence. If each of us existed as a con -
tinuous flow of states, this might be the end of the story. But as
we’ve discussed, the complex systems of our minds are capable ofabrupt transitions into markedly different states. These state transi -
tions lack cohesion and continuity. How, then, does the mind
achieve coherence across self-states?
The struggle to satisfy needs and desires within a complex social
world is often filled with conflict. Examples can be found in manyperiods of life: a married adult’s desire to explore his sexuality withother adults, but also to maintain affiliation with spouse and family;a young professional’s struggle to balance her drive to achieve on apersonal level with her need to be a part of a group process; an ado-lescent’s need to have an identity as a member of his peer group,while at the same time seeking a sense of individuality and auton-omy; a child’s drive to master new situations and yet her desire tofeel safe in a familiar environment. Each of these individuals can beseen as experiencing “conflictual needs,” which are a part of theexperience of segmented self-states. The properties we’ve seen instates of mind, the research on normal child and adolescent develop -
ment, and the findings of cognitive neuroscience all suggest that in
fact the normal functioning of the mind consists of many processesthat can indeed function fairly autonomously. Just as the body ismade up of its component parts, the mind as a whole system is madeup of the activity of these multiple self-states.
At the transition between self-states, there may be a temporary
disorganization or incohesion and discontinuity in the activity of thebrain; however, once a new state of mind is instantiated, cohesion isreestablished. How can a four-dimensional sense of coherence be cre -
ated with such discontinuous transitions across states? Why can’t the
mind merely function as independent sets of self-states? Answeringthese questions is facilitated by reviewing the way the mind functionsas a self-organizational system.Integration 315

Self-organization at the level of the mind must involve the inte -
grative processing of these self-states across time and context. It is at
the moments of transition that new self-organizational forms can beconstructed. Indeed, integrating coherence of the mind is about stateshifts. Congruity and unity emerge at the interface of how informa -
tion and energy—the defining elements of the mind—flow across
states. As Allan Schore has stated,
The term “self-organization” can be imprecise and misleading,
because first, despite the implications of the two words used todescribe the process, self-organization occurs in interaction withanother self—it is not monadic but dyadic. And second, the orga -
nization of brain systems does not involve a simple pattern of
increments but rather large changes in organization. Development,the process of self-assembly, thus involves both progressive andregressive phenomena, and is best characterized as a sequence ofprocesses of organization, disorganization, and reorganization.
31
Integration is about how the mind creates a coherent self-assembly of
information and energy flow across time and context. Integrationcreates the subjective experience of self.
Some people, then, can spend the vast majority of their time in
cohesive, albeit relatively independent, self-states. If these states arenot conflictual with one another—if the desires, beliefs, goals, andbehaviors of one state are not in destructive competition withanother—then what is the problem? Perhaps there is none. For theseindividuals, a coherent mind may be a natural developmental out -
come of authentic nurturing relationships, supportive experiences
with teachers in school, meaningful friendships, and identificationwith peer groups, which have all contributed to the development of acapacity for self-organization in a wide variety of contexts. Integra -
tion establishes a sense of congruity and unity of the mind as it
emerges within the flexible patterns in the flow of information andenergy processes of the brain, both within itself and in interactionwith others. This is coherence.
For other people, conflicts among different needs, mental mod -
els, and self-states may lead to internal distress or external difficulties
that create dysfunction. Such a conflict among self-states within anindividual can create incoherence. Incoherence may develop from
insecure or conflictual attachments, difficulties in meeting school orjob expectations, or significant trouble with finding companions infriendships or peer groups. Incoherence may be revealed in various316 THE DEVELOPING MIND

ways, such as impairments in affect regulation, insecurity, unresolved
trauma or loss, and dysfunctional social relationships. Whether withprofessionals or in intimate relationships, an active approach to cre -
ating coherence may become necessary.
The Adapting Mind: Disorganized Attachment
as an Example of Impaired Integration
As noted in earlier chapters, the parents of children with disorga -
nized attachments have provided frightened, frightening, or disorient -
ing shifts in their own behavior, which create conflictual experiences
leading to incoherent mental models.32Such a child may develop an
internal mental model for each aspect of the parent’s behavior.Abrupt shifts in parental state force the child to adapt with suddenlyshifting states of his own. Such state shifts may occur if the nature ofthese experiences is profoundly incompatible with attachment and/orif the child is neurobiologically capable of intense dissociative pro-cesses. With frequent experiences, the child can rapidly enter “alteredstates” to meet the interactive demands of the parent’s sudden shiftsin behavior. When such shifts are early, severe, and repeated, thesestates can become engrained in the child as self-states. The child bothlearns the processes of abrupt, dissociative state shifting and developsspecific self-states that can be activated in response to specific exter-nal context cues. The result of these internal state shifts can be thatthe child may come to develop several forms of attachment with theparent: some avoidant, some ambivalent, some disorganized, andperhaps even some secure. These can be considered nonintegratedworking models of attachment.
The quality of the relationship between the parent and child
may thus vary significantly across repeated clusters of interactiveexperiences. Parent and child may enter various forms of “dyadicstates” characterized by unique communication styles. A parent whodisavows the existence of certain dyadic states (such as during peri -
ods of terrifying a child), without later repairing and reconnecting
after such ruptured connections, will promote dissociative adapta -
tions. A parent with unresolved trauma or loss may enter trance-like
states that are frightening to a child but are unrecognized and unac -
knowledged by the parent. Such state shifts lead to disconnections in
attunement, which, if left unrepaired, can lead the child to have pro -
foundly disturbing underlying feelings of shame and humiliation.
33
Some individuals have experienced secure attachments with cer -
tain caregivers and disorganized ones with others. In such cases, iso -Integration 317

lation of the attuned dyadic states may maintain high functioning
within self-systems that have reflective functioning, as well as thecapacity to integrate a coherent sense of self across the self-states
within that securely attached clustered system. The AAI narratives of
such persons may reveal an integrated coherence that on the surfaceappears to be highly functional. This is revealed in coherent storiesabout limited parts of the persons’ lives. When certain psychosocialcontexts, moments of stress, or less integrated subsystems emerge,then integration, reflective functioning, and narrative coherence maybecome impaired. In the narratives and lives of less well-functioningindividuals, there may be a more generalized absence of any suchreflective or integrative capacity, as a result of their more pervasiveinsecure attachment histories. These individuals may have had nodevelopmental experience of interactive communication, which wouldhave promoted such abilities. These individuals may have more diffi -
culty utilizing internal or interpersonal resources, and thus havemore marked impairments in their ability to cope with stress and to
self-organize.
Giovanni Liotti has proposed that several different trajectories
are possible in the setting of disorganized attachment.
34If parental
behavior becomes more predictable later in a child’s life, even in thenon-nurturing direction, then the child may minimize the conflictamong the mental models of attachment that have been developed inthe context of the abrupt and confusing shifts in the parent’s behav-ior. In the case of a parent’s becoming more predictable, then, thechild may “settle” on one model or another. If the parent continuesto exhibit disorienting behaviors, but these are not overly trauma -
tizing, the child may develop the potential for future dissociation,
especially under conditions of stress. A third pathway suggested byLiotti is that if the parent’s behavior remains severely traumatizingand chronic, then the disorganized attachment may evolve into a dis -
sociative disorder. At the extreme of this spectrum is dissociative
identity disorder (formerly known as multiple personality disorder).
Elizabeth Carlson, working with the Minnesota Parent–Child
Project, has provided longitudinal support for Liotti’s proposal thatchildren with disorganized attachments are predisposed to developclinical symptoms of dissociation later in life.
35This, combined with
the finding that dissociation itself puts those who experience stressfulevents at risk of developing clinical posttraumatic stress disorder,
36
suggests that disorganized attachment experiences early in life maylead to inadequate coping mechanisms and impaired interactivecapacities. This vulnerability, in turn, makes these individuals less318 THE DEVELOPING MIND

likely to be able to resolve trauma or grief, if such stressors are
encountered later in life. In disorganized attachments, the core of theself remains fractured. As Ogawa and colleagues have stated,
Self, in fact, refers to the integration and organization of diverse
aspects of experience, and dissociation can be defined as the fail -
ure to integrate experience .... When experience is acknowledged
and accepted, integration inevitably follows, because the self can -
not help seeking meaning and coherence from experience. When
experience is dissociated, however, integration is not possible, andto the extent that dissociation prevails, there is fragmentation ofthe self. A coherent, well-organized self depends on integration,and thus psychopathological dissociation represents a threat tooptimal development of the self.
37
For the child with disorganized attachment, in other words, relation-
ship experiences have severely hampered the developmental acquisi-tion of the capacity to achieve coherence. The segmentation of men-tal processes becomes an engrained process itself: dissociation.
What is dissociation? Numerous books have been written about
the conceptualization, history, genesis, evaluation, psychopathology,and treatment of dissociative disorders. For the purposes of thischapter, let us look briefly at the self-organizational aspects of disso-ciative states of mind, and see how such states involve an impairmentin the ability to achieve coherence of the self. The reader is referredto other sources for a more comprehensive review of this importantarea.
38
“Dissociation” is a term with many meanings. Clinicians use the
term to refer to a discontinuity in mental functioning that is a part ofa number of disorders, such as panic, borderline personality, andposttraumatic stress disorders. Dissociation includes the phenomenaof depersonalization, derealization, and psychogenic amnesia. Theterm is also used to refer to a specific group of clinical disorders,including dissociative identity disorder, dissociative fugue, dissocia -
tive amnesia, and depersonalization disorder. In any of these latter
conditions, there is a disruption in the integration of various pro -
cesses, including memory, identity, perception, and consciousness.
39
Clinical dissociation can be viewed as a dis-association in the
usually integrative functioning of the mind. How does this happen?Mental functioning emanates from anatomically distinct and fairlyautonomous circuits, each of which can be dis-associated from thefunction of the others. Studies of a drug called ketamine demonstrateIntegration 319

that administering it to normal subjects leads to dissociative symp -
toms, such as depersonalization and derealization.40Subjects with
prior histories of trauma experience the additional symptoms of ter -
ror and panic. Ketamine blocks the transmission of signals across the
synapses of large neurons, which are especially plentiful in the asso -
ciational regions of the cortex. This finding suggests that the dis-
association of functions in dissociation may be mediated by a block -
age in the integrative capacity of associational regions, which coordi -
nate an array of neural pathways.
As an information-processing system, the mind has layers of rep -
resentational processes that are created by various inputs from more
and more complex representational levels. Studies of brain functionreveal that neural pathways have such layers of input, in which sec -
ondary and tertiary association areas link streams of neural activity
into more and more complex networks of activation.
41These pro -
cesses in turn influence a widely distributed set of neural processesresponsible for our emotional states, bodily response, reasoning,
memory retrieval, and perceptual biases.
42Regions of the brain such
as the orbitofrontal cortex, which function to coordinate these dispa-rate functions across time, may be proposed to play a crucial role inthe integrative process. Various mental processes may thus be func-tionally isolated from one another with the blockage of integrativecircuits. As we’ve seen, these associational functions include socialcognition, autonoetic consciousness, response flexibility, stimulusappraisal, and affect regulation.
43Isolation of these functions may be
at the core of incoherence during dissociative experiences.
OBSERVING INTEGRATION
Coherence and Complexity
We can propose that integration creates coherence by enabling the
mind’s flow of information and energy to achieve a balance in itsmovement toward maximizing complexity. This movement of theflow of states of mind can involve activity both within the mind itselfand in interactions with other minds. This balance means that the
system moves between sameness and rigidity on the one hand, andnovelty and chaos on the other. As we’ve seen, systems achieve sta -
bility as they flow between these extremes in their movement toward
maximal complexity. Within this optimal flow are connections of the320 THE DEVELOPING MIND

processes both within a single mind and between minds. Integration
involves the recruitment of internal and interpersonal processes intoa mutually activating co-regulation, which we have earlier defined as“resonance.” We can thus look at resonance within both internalprocesses and interpersonal relationships to understand how themind’s attempts at integration bring about coherence.
Resonance, as we’ve discussed earlier, is the property of interact -
ing systems that defines the influence of each system’s activity on the
other. Between two individuals, for example, emotionally attunedand contingent communication creates interpersonal resonance; eachmember of the dyad is influenced by the other. Within the brain, theneural process of reentry can help us to understand how distinct cir -
cuits can become involved in a resonating state. Circuit Asends sig -
nals to B,which in turn sends signals back to A,and so on. The
reentrant activity of such a circuit links AandBas an integrated sys -
tem at that moment. In this manner, AandBare part of a state-de-
pendent process. In a different state, the activity of Amay have little
influence on that of B.Resonance is a term that can thus be used to
describe the nature of a system’s contingent, reentrant, co-regulatinginfluences of the interacting elements—whether these are clusters ofneurons, circuits, systems, hemispheres, or entire brains (as in inter-personal communication). In resonance, the subcomponent partsbecome functionally linked in an integrated system.
Let’s try to define the relationships among the terms “integra-
tion,” “coherence,” “cohesion,” and “resonance.” We’ve defined“integration” as the process that creates coherence in the mind.“Coherence” is the state of the system in which many layers of neu -
ral functioning become activated and “cohere” to each other over
time. Complexity theory gives us some insight into why this linkingprocess may occur: States of the system that maximize complexityachieve stability. In this way, integration defines the self. As the mindmoves toward complexity, it recruits various layers of processes intoa cohesive state of mind. “Cohesion” is thus a state in whichsubcomponents become linked together at a given moment in time.As the mind emerges across time, cohesive states become a part of acoherent flow. The linkages of subcomponents—whether in a givenmoment (cohesion) or across time (coherence)—are achieved by theprocess of integration. Integration recruits differentiated subcom -
ponent circuits into a larger functional system through a fundamen -
tal reentry process. The co-regulating, mutually influencing state of
reentrant connections is called “resonance.” In other words, integra -Integration 321

tion utilizes the resonance of different subsystems to achieve cohesive
states and a coherent flow of states across time. Such a process cre -
ates a more complex, functionally linked system, which itself can
become a subcomponent of even larger and more complex systems.
Translating this often nonconscious process into words is quite a
challenge. Within particular sensory modalities, for example, theremay be a feeling of “connection” with the object in the focus of con -
scious attention. Looking at a flower can become a dynamic, con -
suming process in which the self and the flower lose their boundaries
within conscious experience. The act of creation in many activitiescan feel as if some powerful flow of energy and information withinthe mind is occurring without intention and with a life of its own.Within interpersonal relationships, integration may be experienced asfullness of communication and spontaneity, in which the self is bothfully present and lost within the flow of a vibrant, unpredictable, andyet reliable dyadic connection.
These experiences have the quality of “joining,” in which the
individual becomes a part of a process larger than the self. As inte-gration occurs, the creation of coherence represents the flow of statesof the system on the “fertile ground between order and chaos”
44—a
path of resonance with a balanced trajectory between rigidity andrandomness. The particular “system” whose states are flowing mayinvolve any level of functioning: localized circuits in the brain, largerneuronal systems, both hemispheres, or two or more minds. The sub-jective experience of coherence will depend on the nature of the ele-ments of the system activated in the resonance created by the integra -
tive process.
Is there empirical support for the relationship between integra -
tion and the creation of such joining experiences? One possible
source of corroboration may come from the studies of “optimalexperiences” by Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi.
45In these investigations,
subjects who had the experience of “flow”—a process in which onecreatively loses oneself in an activity—often seemed to have well-developed skills at becoming highly focused and fully immersed in anactivity, such as athletics, playing music, or writing. Csikszentmihalyihas suggested that such flow experiences involve the individual’smoving between the boundaries of boredom on the one hand andanxiety on the other. We can propose that these experiences maxi -
mize the complexity of an individual’s states in their movement
between rigidity/order (boredom) and randomness/chaos (anxiety).We can also suggest that such experiences actually become self-rein -322 THE DEVELOPING MIND

forcing, as they facilitate the development of integrative processes
within the individual that enhance the capacity for joining in a vari -
ety of contexts. The capacity for such a joining process might be
revealed in an individual’s immersion within an activity (“flow”), aswell as within the collaborative communication of interpersonal rela -
tionships. This possibility is supported by Csikszentmihalyi’s finding
that individuals who experienced flow tended to have a combinationof highly specialized individual skills and a capacity for being sociallyintegrated with others. Future studies may be helpful in exploring thepossible ways in which the capacities for joining within activities andwithin interpersonal relationships are related to each other as well asto the development of integrative processes, and perhaps emotionalwell-being, across the lifespan.
The Narrative Process
What evidence is available to help us understand the integrativeprocess and to support the notion that it actually exists? There areseveral sources of data. The first we will examine is the integrativefunction of narratives. Studies of child development reveal that bythe third year of life, a “narrative” function emerges in childrenand allows them to create stories about the events they encounterduring their lives.
46These narratives are sequential descriptions of
people and events that condense numerous experiences into gener-alizing and contrasting stories. New experiences are compared toold ones. Similarities are noted in creating generalized rules, anddifferences are highlighted as memorable exceptions to these rules.The stories are about making sense of events and the mental expe -
riences of the characters. Filled with the elements of the characters’
internal experience in the context of interactions with others in theworld, these stories appear to be functioning to create a sense ofcoherent comprehension of the individual in the world across time.
Is this related to a drive to create coherence among the disparate
aspects of one’s own mind? We could argue that it is, but this is notnecessarily the case. Narratives may at times selectively focus on theminds of others and on external contexts, not on one’s own internalexperience. Children begin as biographers and emerge into autobiog -
raphers. As Dennie Wolf has discussed, a child begins to develop an
“authorial self” by two years of age. In her view, “authorship is theability to act independent[ly] of the impinging facts of a situation.”Such a process requires the ability to “uncouple” various versions ofIntegration 323

experience, as well as the “emergence of explicit forms of representa -
tion to mark the nature of and movement among the stances of the
self.”47This view is based on the notion that the child can adopt dif -
ferent perspectives on or versions of the experience of self. As Wolf
states, “Our most immediate definition of self is that of a coherentand distinctive center: a bodily container, an anchor point for oursense of agency, a single source for our emotions (no matter howchaotic), or a kind of volume where the chapters of a very personalhistory accumulate.”
48As the child experiences different domains of
self-experience (or “self-states,” as we have defined them), theauthorial self is challenged to incorporate these different “versions ofthe self” into an autobiographical narrative process. The develop -
ment of such a personal process, as we’ve seen in other domains, is
extremely dependent upon social experience.
49
The narrative process in this way attempts to make sense of the
world and of one’s own mind and its various states. In some individ-uals, however, one sees narratives that reflect upon a particular self-state without creating a more global coherence of the mind as awhole. The narrative process is thus a fundamental building block ofan integrative mode, but insufficient by itself to create coherenceacross self-states through time. Let’s look at three other sources ofdata that can help us explore the nature of integration and its poten-tial relationship to the narrative process.
Hidden Observers
A second source of information regarding an integrative mode ofprocessing consists of studies of normal subjects in hypnotic ortrance-like states. In this condition, the vast majority of the popula -
tion appears to have a third-party observing capacity, which has been
called a “hidden observer,” “observing ego,” “internal self-helper,”or “inner guide.”
50The hidden observer reveals itself under hypnosis
or guided imagery as a form of mental output that makes commentsabout the person: “Dan is working too much; he should slow downand relax more,” or “Her need to get this project done is interferingwith her ability to exercise. She should stop being so busy with theproject.” This function reveals the mind’s capacity for processingmindsight, representing states of mind, and processing the context ofan experience over time. Comments such as these, made under thehypnotic condition of focused internal concentration, are intended toalter the functioning of the individual as a whole. This appears to be324 THE DEVELOPING MIND

not just an observing function (information representation), but also
an effort to use this information to change other aspects of behavior(processing the information and causing further effects). We cantherefore view the hidden observer as an integrative attempt of themind to create a sense of coherence across its own states throughtime and contexts.
Does the hidden observer exist beyond the conditions of hypno -
sis? Several sources of information suggest that it does. First of all, as
we’ve just seen, children develop the capacity at an early age to nar -
rate their own lives from multiple perspectives, including the third-
person, observer perspective. Second, studies of memory reveal thatpeople have the capacity for observer recollections in which theyrecall themselves from a distant perspective, seeing themselves in ascene from the past as if they were watching themselves from afar.
51
Furthermore, clinical studies of patients with a variety of disordersreveal an internal process that comments on ongoing experience. Inpatients with dissociative disorders, an “internal self-helper” thatattempts to coordinate some of the disparate activities of the mind isquite a common self-state.
52Individuals with depression may experi-
ence an “internal voice” that is demeaning and pessimistic, and thatfurther entrenches the negative, depressed mood.
What does the hidden observer tell us about interpersonal expe-
rience? In examining the relationship between hypnosis and develop-mental processes, Brian Vandenberg states, first, that hypnosisreveals how “social exchange and intrapsychic functioning interpen-etrate, that self and other, cognitive and social, individual and cultureare intimately enmeshed”; second, that it suggests that “thought andexperience are not always continuous, seamless, autonomous, andinternal but involve discontinuities, dislocations, and alterations thatare structured by contextual factors”; and, third, that hypnotic statesreflect “the childhood experience of lability of grounding, and of ‘re -
ceiving speech’ from an authoritative other who provides stability in
an uncertain world.”
53Communication with a parent, in other
words, can enable a child to achieve a sense of coherence in the faceof confusing shifts in the internal and external worlds. Could it bethat children’s early relationship experiences with contingent commu -
nication and reflective dialogue facilitate the development of an
“internal voice” that addresses the self from a third-person perspec -
tive and helps integrate a sense of coherence? Could this form of
thought be the internalization of interpersonal dialogue, as LevVygotsky has suggested?
54Future studies examining the relationshipsIntegration 325

among parent–child attachment, discourse, narrative, and the hidden
observer will help elucidate these processes.
Hemispheric Laterality
A third source of information supporting the existence of an integra -
tive mode of processing consists of research on the specialized func -
tions of the brain’s two hemispheres. The following findings (many
of which have been reviewed earlier) have been consistently obtainedin investigations ranging from studies of “split-brain” patients tostudies involving brain function imaging. When information is pre -
sented to only the left hemisphere, verbal output reflects an effort to
create a story or make sense of what it sees or hears. MichaelGazzaniga and colleagues have called this the “interpreter” functionof the left hemisphere.
55For the isolated left hemisphere, these words
are confabulations—made-up stories that fit with the data, but areunrelated to the gist or context of the situation. In these studies, theleft hemisphere appears to lack the contextual representations of theright hemisphere, but nevertheless creates a story to explain the lim-ited information at its disposal. The left hemisphere uses syllogisticreasoning, stating major and minor premises and deducing logicalconclusions from a limited set of data in an attempt to clarify cause–effect relationships. For example, if a subject with an isolated lefthemisphere is asked about a picture showing a boy and his father,the left hemisphere will take the details of the scene and create a fab-ricated explanation of what the two people are doing. Surroundingelements, such as the fact that the other parts of the picture reveal abaseball game or the facial expressions of the pair, are ignored. Thesecontextual elements do not appear to be perceived by the left hemi -
sphere, or at least they are ignored when it comes to explaining what
the scene is about. The left hemisphere’s interpreter function seems tobe driven primarily by a need to reason about cause–effect relation -
ships, rather than to establish some coordinated or coherent view of
“truth.” In this manner, some authors have suggested that the lefthemisphere may be primarily responsible for the creation of distortedand “false” memories of past experiences.
56
In contrast to the left, the right hemisphere appears to be able to
make sense of the essential meaning of the input it is able to per -
ceive: Contextual information is perceived and processed, and the
gist of a situation is sized up and understood. The right hemispheredoes not use syllogistic logic to deduce conclusions about cause–326 THE DEVELOPING MIND

effect relationships, but rather represents information about the envi -
ronment. Such information includes the relationships of various com -
ponents of experience, including elements of mental processes and
spatial relationships. Since the right hemisphere is nonverbal, theoutput of its processing must be expressed in non-word-based ways,such as drawing a picture or pointing to a pictorial set of options tomake its output known to the external world.
As discussed at length in prior chapters, these hemispheric differ -
ences have embryological origins and reflect a dominance of process -
ing in the dorsal or ventral circuits on each side of the brain. Numer -
ous studies support the view that the capacity for mindsight is right-
hemisphere-mediated. The registration and regulation of bodily state,the perception and expression of nonverbal signals of affective state,the coordination of social and emotional input with the appraisalcenters of the brain, and the retrieval of autobiographical memory allappear to be predominantly mediated by the right hemisphere. Thecapacity to represent states of mind within the mind is probablymediated within the right-hemisphere’s domains of processing. Wehave thus proposed that reflective function, which permits mental-izing, is likely to be mediated primarily by the right hemisphere.
These laterality studies suggest several relevant aspects of the
mind’s functioning. The left hemisphere tries to create explanationsfor the information it receives, but it lacks the ability to process thecontext of this information, and so its conclusions are based onselected details without relational meaning. The left hemisphere’sinterpreter deduces an explanation that is superficially logical but isoften without contextual substance if this hemisphere is acting in iso -
lation from information from the right hemisphere. The right hemi -
sphere processes the overall gist of a scene and creates a context-rich
representational “understanding.” The right hemisphere specializesin the ability to perceive the mental states of others and to representothers’ minds. Although it may not use syllogistic reasoning to inter -
pret and deduce cause–effect relationships, it has a reflective under -
standing of the social world of other minds.
Making Sense of Minds
Another important implication of the three sets of studies reviewed
to this point is that people are constantly trying to “make sense” ofwhat they experience. On one level, making sense means trying tounderstand cause–effect relationships—what is happening and why itIntegration 327

happened. Why does the mind try to do this? (Even the asking of this
question reflects the human mind’s need to make sense of things,including the mind itself!) A straightforward answer comes from the
reverse-engineering approach of evolutionary thinking: Individuals
whose brains were able to understand cause–effect relationships weremore likely to survive and to pass on their genetic material. Why?Because if the mind can perceive the events of the world, rememberthem, extract cause–effect relationships (understanding, makingsense), and use these processes to influence the outcome of futurebehavior in the world, then it will be more likely to survive. As wehave noted throughout this book, the brain functions as an anticipa -
tion machine; it takes data from the perceived world and prepares
itself for the next event. Individuals whose brains were good at antic -
ipating did better than those whose brains merely lived in the here-
and-now. For instance, it was easier to avoid a lion if people figuredout that a growl (cause) could indicate the presence of a lion whowould eat them (effect). Such is the basis for learning. Such is thebasis for making sense of the world.
Making sense of the social world of minds is a bit more compli-
cated, but it involves the same basic problem of cause–effect relation-ships. What does the scowl of another person “mean”? How do thesubtle and rapid signals, both verbal and nonverbal, from other peo-ple reveal what is happening and what may happen next? Knowingwhom to trust and whom to be wary of is essential in negotiatingone’s way through the human world of social interactions. The statesof mind of others—their intentions, beliefs, attitudes, and emo -
tions—predispose an individual to behave in a certain way. The abil -
ity to anticipate the behavior of others is dependent upon the ability
to understand other minds.
Functioning in a complex social network enhances people’s
capacity to survive as individuals, reproduce, and create a group oflike-minded individuals who share such a capacity. This can be seenas a form of interindividual integration, in which an individualbecomes a member of a community beyond the dyadic relationshipsof attachment and friendship. The potential for such a group tobecome a functionally cohesive system of individuals will enhancethe chances of that group’s surviving in competition with isolatedhumans or with groups that cannot process such social communica -
tion signals as well. Such shared mentalizing abilities permit the
group to function as a cohesive system composed of connected indi -
viduals. This allows for a “group state” to be achieved, which can328 THE DEVELOPING MIND

facilitate the development of a highly effective problem-solving sys -
tem to meet challenges in a world filled with competition. Being a
member of a group in this way confers a sense of safety, security, andstability on an individual. A number of studies suggest complex rela -
tionships among early attachment history, experiences with teachers,
relationships with friends, and social competence in peer groups.
57
One of these studies has shown, for example, that peer acceptanceand leadership abilities are associated with a history of secure attach -
ments.
58Relationships, both early and later in life, clearly make a dif -
ference as our lives evolve. Overall, these findings support the notion
that the individual continues to develop in interaction with an evolv -
ing set of internal processes as well as social experiences within inter -
personal and group relationships.
Through the life course, the individual mind attempts to create a
coherent internal, interpersonal, and group experience. Such an inte -
grative process places the system of the individual mind within the con-text of complex social forces, which directly shape the life course in
often unpredictable ways. As Glenn Elder has described, “life coursetheory and research alert us to this real world, a world in which livesare lived and where people work out paths of development as best theycan. It tells us how lives are socially organized in biological and histori-cal time, and how the resulting social pattern affects the way we think,feel and act.”
59Our minds are in this manner continually processing
both internal and social experiences as we develop through time.
The finding that our minds appear to have “cheater detectors,”
which identify misleading social communications intended to maskthe true inner states and intentions of others, supports this idea thatgroup functioning has been a central shaping force in the evolutionof the human mind.
60Natural selection has thus enabled our minds
to evolve mindsight capacities. Being able to navigate our waythrough such an intense social world requires the ability to makesense of other minds. Communicating the more elaborate and intri -
cate learned aspects of this mentalizing knowledge to others allows
the benefits of one individual’s wisdom and experience to be sharedwith others in the group. This knowledge is transmitted from oneindividual to others in the group by means of storytelling. Making
sense of other minds is the essential stuff of narratives. This means
that the mentalizing representations of the right hemisphere mayneed to be integrated with the interpreting ones of the left in boththe expression and reception of such information. What can storiestell us about such an integrative process?Integration 329

AN INTERPERSONAL NEUROBIOLOGY
OF STORIES
Narrative and Neural Integration
Narrative may have originated as a fundamental part of social dis -
course. Recall that stories are created within a social context between
human minds. The process of narrative is thus inherently social. Thecontents of stories are human lives and mental experiences. De -
scribing an interpersonal neurobiology of stories may be helpful in
elucidating the fundamental processes involved in how narrativefacilitates the integration of coherence within the mind. Let’s firstreview some aspects of the neural integration involved in stories.
The hippocampus is considered a “cognitive mapper”: It gives
the brain a sense of the self in space and in time, regulates the orderof perceptual categorizations, and links mental representations toemotional appraisal centers.
61These are multiple layers of integra-
tion.
A number of authors propose that the associational areas of the
neocortex, such as the prefrontal regions (including the orbitofrontalcortex) that link various widely distributed representational processestogether, form dynamic global maps or complex representations fromthe input of widely distributed regions in order to establish a sensori-motor integration of the self across space and time.
62This capacity
allows for the anticipation of and planning for future events as theyare created from the integrated representation of the experiences ofthe self. This is autonoetic consciousness. Such a spatiotemporal inte -
grating process can be proposed to be fundamental to the narrative
mode of cognition. This mapping process may be at the heart ofautobiographical narrative and the way the mind attempts to achievea sense of coherence among its various states: trying to make senseof the self in the past, the present and the anticipated future. We canpropose that the capacity of the mind to create such a global map ofthe self across time and various contexts—to have autonoetic con -
sciousness—is an essential feature of integration that may continue
to develop throughout life.
Narrative can also be viewed as requiring both right- and left-
hemisphere modes of processing information. The right brain’s per -
ceptually rich, analogic, context-dependent, autonoetic, mentalizing
representations create much of the imagery and many of the themesof the narrative process. The logical, linear, “making sense” interpre -330 THE DEVELOPING MIND

tations of these representations and the communication of narrative
details stem from the left hemisphere’s interpretive and linguistic pro -
cessing of digital representations. On each side of the brain, these
processes may reflect a vertical integration of various representation -
al processes. As the dorsal tract processes (dominant in the right
hemisphere) interconnect with those of the ventral tract (dominant inthe left hemisphere), dorsal–ventral integration begins to occur. With -
in these forms of integration, processes on the right begin to be inte -
grated with those on the left. We can propose the following bilateral
integration process for narratives: The left hemisphere’s drive to
understand cause–effect relationships is a primary motivation of thenarrative process. Coherent narratives, however, require participationof both the interpreting left hemisphere and the mentalizing righthemisphere. Coherent narratives are created through interhemis -
pheric integration.
Integration that recruits multiple layers of circuits may create the
most complex states as it links various forms of representationthroughout the brain (and, as we’ll see, between brains). Vertical,dorsal–ventral, lateral, interhemispheric, and spatiotemporal formsof integration are all present within the narrative process. The “driveto make sense of the mind,” drawing on these multidimensional lay-ers of integration, may in part be seen as a way the brain achieves amore stable (complex) connection among its various representationalprocesses. The left hemisphere’s effort to find cause–effect relation-ships draws upon the right hemisphere’s retrieval of autobiographicaland mentalizing representations. Such multilayered integration mayexist independently of narration. In other words, the mind may beinternally driven to link these layers of representational processes asa function of achieving coherence within the mind itself. Such inter -
nal coherence may be revealed within the orbitofrontal cortex’s
capacity for response flexibility and may reflect the integration of arange of prefrontally mediated processes. As we attempt to commu -
nicate a shareable set of representations within autobiographical sto -
ries, we must use the linguistic translations and interpretations of the
left hemisphere in order to express the narrative of our lives. Such acommunication process lets us see for ourselves, and share with oth -
ers, the fundamental way in which our minds come to integrate
experience.
As we’ve discussed in Chapter 2, Endel Tulving and colleagues
have postulated a dual role for the frontal lobes on each side of thebrain. In their “hemispheric encoding–retrieval asymmetry” hypothe -Integration 331

sis, the left hemisphere is seen as the primary mediator of autobio -
graphical encoding, whereas the right is responsible for retrieval.63
Autonoetic consciousness gives us the ability to perform “mental
time travel,” in which we can represent the self in the past, present,and future.
64We have also discussed the possibility that the consoli -
dation of memory into permanent storage may require REM sleep
and thus depend on the synchronous activation of both hemispheres.We have proposed that this bilateral activation of the brain may per -
mit a rhythmic process in which right frontal activation retrieves
autobiographical representations from more posterior regions of theright brain. The transfer of this information to the left orbitofrontalregions may then allow encoding to occur. In essence, this may bethe encoding of the newly assembled representations created fromretrieved memory. Items in long-term (nonpermanent) storage in thisway may be retrieved (right side) and encoded (left side) in a processthat integrates information from recent and more distant past experi-ences as well as from imagination, current perception, and randomactivations. As Winson has suggested, the electrical activity andneuroendocrine milieu of the REM stage of sleep may allow for theconsolidation of memory via the induction of the long-term poten-tiation of synaptic connections.
65This bilateral encoding–retrieval
process may facilitate the creation of new and strengthened associa-tional links. This process may also reveal how memory retrieval actsas a “memory modifier” in this setting of bilateral activation, permit-ting recent recollections of the day’s experiences to be synthesizedwith prior elements of memory within a constructive and thematicnarrative process.
In this proposal, interhemispheric integration is essential for
memory consolidation. Dreaming, REM sleep, and cortical consoli -
dation become the integrating processes that mediate autobiographi -
cal narrative. Blockage of these integrating processes may be seen as
the core of unresolved trauma and may be revealed as one form ofincoherence in autobiographical narratives. Autonoetic consciousnessmay thus be impaired as the ability to integrate representations ofthe self across past, present, and future is disrupted in lack of resolu -
tion. This proposal regarding narrative, consolidation, and bilateral
integration is a hypothesis in need of validation. As Milner, Squire,and Kandel have noted, we are still far from understanding the exactmechanisms behind the consolidation process.
66Future research will
need to clarify exactly how this consolidation process occurs.
The ways in which interpersonal experience shapes both implicit332 THE DEVELOPING MIND

memory and explicit memory directly affect our life stories. Narra -
tives, though they draw on consciously accessible explicit memory,
are also influenced by implicit recollections. Our dreams and storiesmay contain implicit aspects of our lives even without our aware -
ness. In fact, storytelling may be a primary way in which we can lin -
guistically communicate to others—as well as to ourselves—the
sometimes hidden contents of our implicitly remembering minds.Stories make available perspectives on the emotional themes of ourimplicit memory that may otherwise be consciously unavailable tous. This may be one reason why journal writing and intimate com -
munication with others, which are so often narrative processes, have
such powerful organizing effects on the mind: They allow us to mod -
ulate our emotions and make sense of the world. Integration, as
observed in coherent narratives, directly shapes self-regulation.
Narrative and Interpersonal Integration
The narrative process also enables a form of interpersonal integra-tion. The external expression of narrative through storytelling is aform of discourse inherently influenced by listeners’ expectations.Early attachment experiences in this way have a direct effect on howchildren learn to narrate their lives and perhaps to develop auto-noetic consciousness. Patterns of collaborative communication allowchildren to develop what Trevarthen has called “narratives of coop-erative awareness.”
67As parents reflect with their securely attached
children on the mental states that create their shared subjective expe -
rience, they are joining with them in an important co-constructive
process of understanding how the mind functions. The inherent fea -
ture of secure attachment—contingent, collaborative communica -
tion—is also a fundamental component in how interpersonal rela -
tionships facilitate internal integration in a child. We can propose
that a parent’s engaging in what we have called reflective dialogue(focusing on the central importance of mental states in humanbehavior and their manifestations as feelings, perceptions, intentions,goals, beliefs, and desires) is also central to both secure attachmentand the integrative process of co-construction of narratives. Socialcompetence and a sense of autonomy, mastery, and self-determinationare aspects of resilience that secure attachment fosters.
68We can pro -
pose that integration also becomes a developmental capacity within
the foundation of nurturing and reflective early relationships.
Secure attachment facilitates integration in the developing childIntegration 333

by allowing for different forms of interpersonal resonance to occur.
Left-hemisphere-to-left-hemisphere resonance takes the form of ver -
bal communication within a linear, logical mode of discourse. Right-
hemisphere-to-right-hemisphere resonance involves the nonverbalcomponents of communication, such as tone of voice, gestures, andfacial expressions. In the co-construction of stories, parent and child
enter into a dyadic form of bilateral resonance: Each person enters astate of interhemispheric integration, which is facilitated by interper -
sonal communication. In this manner, secure attachment involves an
intimate dance of resonant processes involving left-to-left, right-to-right, and bilateral-to-bilateral communication. This highly complexform of collaborative communication allows the dyad to move intohighly resonant states, and also enables the child’s mind to developits own capacity for integration. Such a capacity may be at the heartof self-regulation.
In insecure attachments, such contingent, resonant communica-
tion often does not occur. For example, the avoidantly attachedchild’s and dismissing adult’s experience can be understood in part asdominated by a primarily left-hemisphere form of communication.These interactions may stem from the parent’s tendency to access pri-marily the nonmentalizing representations of a dominant left-hemi-sphere interpreter. In fact, studies of the correspondence betweenaffective expression (right hemisphere) and verbal communication(left hemisphere) reveal such a dis-association in these dyads.
69The
capacity to blend the nonverbal/prosodic elements of dialogue withthose of semantic/linguistic meaning requires the harmonious collab -
oration between the hemispheres.
70As Sroufe has noted, “shared
emotion is the fabric of social relationships” and “provides therhythm or punctuation in human interaction and communication.”
71
Thus avoidant attachment reveals an emotional impairment in theability of two minds to communicate fully. Resonance and the capac -
ity to integrate experience in a complex and interhemispheric way
are significantly restricted. This absence of emotion produces asevere restriction in the level of interpersonal connection that parentand child are able to achieve. Such a condition reflects the centralrole emotion plays as an integrating process, both within the mindand between minds.
Within the individual mind, bilateral integration may occur in
creative processes of many forms. My clinical work with insecurelyattached individuals who experience a transformation in their “stateof mind with respect to attachment” within psychotherapy or other334 THE DEVELOPING MIND

emotionally involving relationships suggests that their new experi -
ence of interpersonal connection allows them to achieve new levels
of mental coherence. This new capacity for integration—both inter -
personal and internal—may create a sense of vitality and a release of
creative energy and ideas, leading to an invigorating sense of per -
sonal expression. Such spontaneous and energized processes can give
rise to participation in various activities, such as painting, music,dance, poetry, creative writing, or sculpture. It can also yield adeeper sense of creativity and appreciation within the “everyday”experience of life: communication with others, walks down thestreet, new appreciation of the richness of perceptions, feelings ofbeing connected to the flow of the moment. Life becomes a process,not merely a focus on products. Part of this experience of creativitymay be derived from the way in which activated elements in onemodality freely recruit those in another. Much of this is non -
conscious, but the new resonance among processes can give rise toan awareness of the activated flow of an emerging, coherent mind.
Many people find this sense of vitality, intensity, and clarity to bequite exhilarating.
The integrating experience of resonance also gives rise to a sense
of spontaneity and creativity when it occurs between two people.Such vibrant connections between minds can be seen within variouskinds of emotional relationships, such as those of romantic partners,friends, colleagues, teachers and students, therapists and patients,and parents and children. Two people become companions on amutually created journey through time. Interpersonal integration canbe seen in spontaneous, resonant communication that flows freelyand is balanced between continuity, familiarity, and predictability onone side and flexibility, novelty, and uncertainty on the other. Neitherpartner of a dyad is fully predictable, yet each is quite familiar. Thecollaborative communication between the two is not merely a reflec -
tive mirror, but a reciprocal, contingent process that moves the pair
into vibrant states neither alone could achieve. The resultant evolvingprocess creates a sense of the emerging complexity and coherence ofintegrating minds.
REFLECTIONS: INTEGRATING MINDS
As the mind emerges within the flow of self-states, it creates coher -
ence across these states by a process we have defined as “integra -Integration 335

tion.” Integration allows the mind to experience the mutual co-regu -
lation of energy flow and information processing, which permits
adaptive, coordinated functioning. Incoherence derives from theinflexible, maladaptive, and restricted flow of energy and informa -
tion within the mind across time. Interpersonal processes can facili -
tate integration by altering the restrictive ways in which the mind
may have come to organize itself.
Creating coherence is a lifetime project. Integration is thus a pro -
cess, not a final accomplishment. It is a verb, not a noun. This process
perhaps is best seen as a form of “resonance,” defined as the mutuallyinfluencing interactions between two or more relatively independentand differentiated entities. This resonance allows two systems toamplify and co-regulate each other’s activity. In the case of one mind,integration allows for the spontaneous flow of energy and informationwithin the whole brain. This spontaneity does not mean random acti -
vation, but the flexible influence of layers of processes upon each other.By contrast, insecure attachment patterns produce incoherence, in that
individuals’ adaptations to suboptimal parenting experiences haveplaced marked restrictions on their capacity for resonance—both with-in their own minds and with other minds.
Autobiographical narratives can reveal integration or incoher-
ence. A coherent narrative reveals a blending of left- and right-hemi-sphere processes. The interpreting left hemisphere is driven to weavea tale of what it knows. When access to the right hemisphere’s repre-sentational processes is limited, such a tale is incoherent. When thementalizing, primary emotional, somatosensory, and autobiographi -
cal processes of the right hemisphere can be drawn upon, the left
brain is able to “make sense” by integrating a coherent life story.Bilateral integration promotes coherent narratives.
The multilayered resonance of contingently communicating
dyadic states allows each individual to acquire new integrative capac -
ities. Two people connect across space by means of the flow of
energy and infor mation from both sides of each brain. This flow is
contained within pat terns of communication. As seen in attachment
relationships, the development of the mind depends upon the basicsof contingent, collaborative communication. Acquiring the capacityfor integrating coherence comes from dyadic communication. Emo -
tional attunement, reflective dialogue, co-construction of narrative,
memory talk, and the interactive repair of disruptions in connectionare all fundamental elements of secure attachment and of effectiveinterpersonal relationships.336 THE DEVELOPING MIND

Connections between minds therefore involve a dyadic form of
resonance in which energy and information are free to flow acrosstwo brains. When such a process is in full activation, the vital feelingof connection is exhilarating. When interpersonal communication is“fully engaged”—when the joining of minds is in full force—there isan overwhelming sense of immediacy, clarity, and authenticity. It is inthese heightened moments of engagement, these dyadic states of reso -
nance, that one can appreciate the power of relationships to nurture
and to heal the mind.Integration 337



NotesNotes
/fl2rt
Notes
Preface
1. Kandel (1998).
2. Stoller (1985, p. x).
Chapter 1
1.Webster’s New World College Dictionary (1997, p. 1085).
2. Kandel and Schwartz (1992); Milner, Squire, and Kandel (1998); Eisenberg
(1995).
3. Eccles (1990); Andreasen (1997).4. Posner (1990).5. Post and Weiss (1997); Post et al. (1998).6. Kandel and Schwartz (1992); Nieuwenhuys, (1994).7. Fuster (1989); Tucker et al. (1995); Rolls (1995).8. Kandel and Schwartz (1992).9. Green et al. (1998, p. 427).
10. Hockfield and Lombroso (1998); Barnes et al. (1995); Kempermann et al.
(1997).
11. Wiesel and Hubel (1963).12. Bowlby (1969, 1988).13. Thelen (1989).14. Baldrini et al. (1998).15. Hubel (1967).16. Schuman (1997).17. Kagan (1992); Nelson (1994).18. Kandel (1998); Hur and Bouchard (1995).19. Benedersky and Lewis (1994); Coe et al. (1992); Goldsmith et al. (1997);
Kendler and Eaves (1986); Rosenblum et al. (1994); Rutter et al. (1997);Gunnar (1992); Teicher et al. (1997); Rakic et al. (1994).
20. Kandel (1998).21. Kandel (1989, 1998); Post and Weiss (1997).
339

22. Rutter (1989).
23. Schore (1997, p. 616).24. Thelen (1989).25. Rutter et al. (1997).26. Pike and Plomin (1996); Plomin (1990).27. Plomin et al. (1991); Dunn and McGuire (1994).28. Kandel (1998).29. Kandel (1998); Schore (1997); Post and Weiss (1997).30. M. Lewis (1992); Gunnar (1990).31. Kagan (1994a).32. Perry (1997).33. Kagan (1994a).34. Gottman and Declaire (1997); Baumrind (1993); van den Boom (1994, 1995).35. Ainsworth et al. (1978); Fonagy et al. (1991b); Pederson et al. (1998).36. Fonagy and Target (1997).
Chapter 2
1. Milner et al. (1998).2. Johnson-Laird (1983); Ingvar (1985); Bechara et al. (1994).3. Tucker (1992); Rolls and Treves (1994).4. McClelland et al. (1995).5. Morris (1989).6. Kandel and Abel (1995); Martin and Kandel (1996).7. Milner et al. (1998).8. Milner et al. (1998, p. 463).9. Bailey and Kandel (1995).
10. Hebb (1949, p. 70).11. Hebb (1949, p. 70).12. Kosslyn (1994).13. Perner (1991).14. Wheeler et al. (1997).15. Kapur et al. (1995); Buckner (1996).16. Schacter (1996).17. Squire (1992); Schacter (1992).18. Schacter (1996).19. Bauer (1996); Schacter (1996); Emde et al. (1991); Fivush and Hudson
(1990).
20. Squire et al. (1993).21. Stern (1985).22. Johnson-Laird (1983).23. Freyd (1987).24. Ingvar (1985).25. Pinker (1997).26. Jensen and Hoagwood (1997).27. Main (1995).28. Schore (1994); Hofer (1994).29. Perry et al. (1995).30. Squire and Zola-Morgan (1991); Perner and Ruffman (1995); Tulving (1993);
Schacter et al. (1996).
31. Edelman (1992); Bauer (1996).340 Notes to Chapter 2

32. Squire (1987).
33. Wheeler et al. (1997).34. Bauer and Dow (1994); K. Nelson (1993a).35. Wheeler et al. (1997).36. Wheeler et al. (1997).37. K. Nelson (1993b); Myers et al. (1987).38. Miller et al. (1990); Ochs and Capps (1996); McCabe and Peterson (1991).39. Fivush (1998); Bauer et al. (1998).40. Moscovitch (1995); Squire et al. (1993).41. Baddeley (1992); Andreasen et al. (1995a).42. Andreasen et al. (1995a); D’Esposito et al. (1995).43. Bailey and Kandel (1995).44. Incisa della Rochetta and Milner (1993); Gershberg and Shimamura (1995).45. Milner et al. (1998); Schacter (1996).46. Kandel (1989).47. Winson (1993); Karni et al. (1992).48. Milner et al. (1998).49. Schacter (1992).50. Wheeler et al. (1997).51. Fink et al. (1996).52. Wheeler et al. (1997).53. Wheeler et al. (1997).54. Buckner (1996).55. Tucker et al. (1995).56. Wheeler et al. (1997).57. Schore (1997); Stecklis and Kling (1985).58. Tucker et al. (1995).59. Damasio (1994).60. Baron-Cohen (1995).61. Schacter (1996); Wheeler et al. (1997).62. Tulving (1993).63. Wheeler et al. (1997).64. Bjork (1989).65. Buckner et al. (1995).66. Freud (1895/1966); Christianson and Lindholm (1998).67. Rovee-Collier (1993); Newcombe and Fox (1994); Meltzoff (1995).68. Perner and Ruffman (1995); Bachevalier (1992); Howe (1998); Nelson and
Carver (1998).
69. K. Nelson (1993a); Bauer and Dow (1994).70. Bauer (1996).71. Bauer et al. (1995).72. Bauer et al. (1998).73. Wheeler et al. (1997); Perner and Ruffman (1995).74. Bauer (1996).75. Bauer and Wewerka (1995).76. Reese and Fivush (1993); McCabe and Peterson (1991); Dunn and Brown
(1991).
77. Bauer et al. (1998, p. 677).78. Bretherton (1993); C. A. Nelson (1993).79. Oppenheim et al. (1997); Fivush (1996).Notes to Chapter 2 341

80. C. A. Nelson and Carver (1998, pp. 798–799).
81. Bjork (1989).82. Christianson (1992).83. Diamond and Rose (1994); Zola-Morgan et al. (1991).84. Siegel (1995a).85. McGaugh (1992); Leichtman et al. (1992); Edelman (1992).86. Edelman (1992).87. McGaugh (1992, pp. 261, 262).88. Milner et al. (1998).89. Post et al. (1998, p. 849).90. McEwen (1999); Lombroso and Sapolsky (1998).91. Bremner and Narayan (1998).92. Howe (1998).93. Bower and Sivers (1998, p. 631).94. Siegel (1995a).95. Siegel (1995a, 1996a); Terr (1998).96. Koopman et al. (1994); Yehuda and McFarlane (1995); van der Kolk and
van der Hart (1989).
97. Bremner et al. (1995).98. van der Kolk et al. (1996); Perry (1997).99. Felitti et al. (1998).
100. Siegel (1995a, 1996a).101. Hobson (1992).102. Tulving et al. (1994); Wheeler et al. (1997).103. Kinsbourne (1972).104. Winson (1993).105. Siegel (1995a).106. Rauch et al. (1996); Schiffer et al. (1995).107. Teicher et al. (1997).108. Bremner et al. (1995).109. van der Kolk et al. (1996); Williams (1995); Freyd (1996); Herman (1992).110. Rauch et al. (1996).111. Terr (1993).112. Schumacher (1991); Bartlett (1932).113. Ceci and Bruch (1993).114. Cicchetti and Toth (1998).115. Fivush (1998, p. 713).116. Christianson and Lindholm (1998, pp. 774, 776).117. Karr-Morse and Wiley (1997); Perry (1997).118. Lynch and Cicchetti (1998a, p. 744).119. Lynch and Cicchetti (1998a, pp. 756–757).120. Bremner and Narayan (1998, pp. 881–882).121. Ochs and Capps (1996); Coles (1989).122. K. Nelson (1989); Cohler (1982).123. Squire (1992).124. Ochs and Capps (1996).125. Vygotsky (1986).126. Britton and Pellegrini (1990); Bruner (1986, 1990); White and Epston
(1990).342 Notes to Chapter 2

127. Baron-Cohen (1995); Baron-Cohen and Ring (1994); Capps et al. (1992).
128. Baddeley (1994).129. Neisser and Fivush (1994).130. Reed (1994, p. 278).
Chapter 3
1. Bowlby (1969).2. Hofer (1994).3. Ainsworth et al. (1978).4. Bowlby (1988); Sroufe (1996).5. Bowlby (1969, 1988).6. Main (1995); Main et al. (1985); Fox et al. (1994); Oppenheim and Waters
(1995).
7. Main (1996).8. Bowlby (1973).9. Main (1995).
10. Jones et al. (1996); Atkinson and Zucker (1997).11. Rutter (1987, 1997).12. Parkes et al. (1991).13. Trevarthen (1993).14. Trevarthen (1993).15. Stern (1985); Haft and Slade (1989).16. Ainsworth et al. (1978); de Wolff and van IJzendoorn (1997); Ward and
Carlson (1995).
17. Hofer (1984).18. Schore (1994).19. Schore (1994); Oppenheim et al. (1997).20. Trevarthen (1993).21. Stern (1985).22. Ainsworth et al. (1978); Dunn (1996).23. Schore (1994).24. Bowlby (1969); George and Solomon (1996).25. Main (1995).26. Bowlby (1969); Bretherton (1992a).27. Bretherton (1992a); Ainsworth et al. (1978).28. Ainsworth et al. (1978).29. Ainsworth et al. (1978).30. Ainsworth et al. (1978).31. Main and Solomon (1986).32. Sroufe (1996); Main (1996); E. Carlson and Sroufe (1995).33. Sroufe and Jacobvitz (1989).34. Bowlby (1988).35. van den Boom (1995); Nachmias et al. (1996); Juffer et al. (1997); Moss and
Gotts (1998); Ramey et al. (1984); Schweinhart and Weikart (1992);Korfmacher et al. (1997); Bakermans-Kranenburg et al. (1998).
36. Main (1995).37. Main (1991).38. Ainsworth et al. (1978).39. van IJzendoorn and Bakermans-Kranenburg (1996).Notes to Chapter 3 343

40. Main (1995).
41. Ainsworth et al. (1978).42. Main and Solomon (1990).43. Main and Hesse (1990).44. V. Carlson et al. (1989); Lyons-Ruth et al. (1991); Ogawa et al. (1997).45. Main (1995).46. Main and Hesse (1990).47. G. Liotti (1992); Main and Morgan (1996).48. Main et al. (1985).49. C. George et al. (1996).50. C. George et al. (1984, 1985, 1996).51. van IJzendoorn (1995); Hesse (1999).52. Main and Goldwyn (1998); Main (1995); Hesse (1999).53. van IJzendoorn and Bakermans-Kranenburg (1996); Waters et al. (1996).54. Hesse (1999); DeHass et al. (1994).55. Hesse (1999).56. Ogawa et al. (1997); Hesse (1999); E. Carlson (1998).57. .Main (1996).58. Main and Goldwyn (1998); Bakermans-Kranenburg and van IJzendoorn
(1993).
59. Bakermans-Kranenburg and van IJzendoorn (1993); Benoit and Parker (1994);
Sagi et al. (1994); Hesse (1999).
60. Bakermans-Kranenburg and van IJzendoorn (1993); Rosenstein and Horowitz
(1996); Sagi et al. (1994); Steele and Steele (1994).
61. Sagi et al. (1994); Bakermans-Kranenburg and van IJzendoorn (1993).62. van IJzendoorn (1995).63. C. George et al. (1996); Hesse (1999).64. Main and Goldwyn (1998).65. Main and Goldwyn (1998).66. Main and Goldwyn (1998).67. C. George et al. (1996).68. Hesse (1996).69. Grice (1975).70. Main and Goldwyn (1998, p. 46).71. Main and Goldwyn (1998).72. Hesse (1996).73. van IJzendoorn (1995).74. Main (1995).75. van IJzendoorn (1992, 1995); Sagi et al. (1994); Hesse (1999).76. Fonagy et al. (1991a); van IJzendoorn (1995).77. Benoit and Parker (1994); Main (1995); van IJzendoorn (1995); van
IJzendoorn and Bakermans-Kranenburg (1996); M. Main (personal communi -
cation, 1998, regarding unpublished reports); Hesse (1999). See discussion in
Fonagy (1998).
78. Ogawa et al. (1997); Main (1995); Main and Goldwyn (1998); Fagot and
Pears (1996); E. Carlson (1998).
79. Main (1995); Steele et al. (1996); Cohn et al. (1992).80. Fonagy et al. (1991a); Hesse (1999); Radojevic (1994); Benoit and Parker
(1994); Ward and Carlson (1995).344 Notes to Chapter 3

81. Steele et al. (1996).
82. Vaughn et al. (1992).83. Plomin et al. (1994a, 1994b); Kendler (1996); J. Cohen (1996).84. Sagi et al. (1997).85. Palaez-Nogueras et al. (1994); National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development (NICHD) Early Child Care Research Network (1997);Hossain et al. (1994).
86. van IJzendoorn and Bakermans-Kranenburg (1996).87. Lichtenstein et al. (1998).88. Main (1995); Benoit et al. (1992); Crowell et al. (1992); Greenberg et al.
(1997).
89. Main (1995); Sroufe (1996); Colin (1996); Cassidy and Shaver (1999);
Bretherton (1992a); Zeanah (1993).
90. Cicchetti and Rogosch (1997b); Ogawa et al. (1997); E. Carlson (1998);
Schuengel et al. (in press).
91. Atkinson and Zucker (1997); Cowan et al. (1996); Crowell et al. (1988);
Fonagy et al. (1996); Manassis et al. (1994); Pianta et al. (1996); Rosensteinand Horowitz (1997); Sroufe (1997); Greenberg et al. (1993); Adam et al.(1996); Bretherton (1996); Zeanah et al. (1997); Routh et al. (1995);Constantino (1996); Allen et al. (1996).
92. Ogawa et al. (1997); E. Carlson (1998).93. Ogawa et al. (1997); E. Carlson (1998); Yehuda and McFarlane (1995).94. Lyons-Ruth et al. (1993); E. Carlson (1998); Herstgaard et al. (1995); Solo-
mon et al. (1995).
95. Lieberman (1991); Moss and Gotts (1998); Butterfield (1996); Durlak and
Wells (1997); Erickson et al. (1992); Zeanah et al. (1997a); Minde andHesse (1996).
96. Main (1995).97. Post and Weiss (1997); Rosenblum et al. (1994).98. Kraemer (1992); Sigman and Siegel (1992).99. Post and Weiss (1997).
100. Kandel (1998).101. Brodsky and Lombroso (1998, pp. 2, 3).102. Goldsmith et al. (1997).103. Perry (1997); Teicher et al. (1997).104. Schore (1997, p. 618).105. Perry (1997); Karr-Morse and Wiley (1997).106. Calkins and Fox (1994); Kagan (1997); Kendler and Eaves (1986); Rothbart
and Ahadi (1994); Thomas and Chess (1977); Bouchard (1994).
107. Merzenich et al. (1991); Merzenich and Sameshima (1993).108. Perry (1997); Karr-Morse and Wiley (1997); Rutter (1997).109. Fonagy (1998).110. Atkinson and Zucker (1997); Cowan et al. (1996); Crowell et al. (1988);
Fonagy et al. (1996); Manassis et al. (1994); Pianta et al. (1996); Rosensteinand Horowitz (1996); Sroufe (1997); Greenberg et al. (1993).
111. Schuengel et al. (in press); see also Schuengel et al. (1997).112. van IJzendoorn and Bakermans-Kranenburg (1997).113. Main (1995).114. Main (1995, p. 451).Notes to Chapter 3 345

115. Schore (1997).
116. Ainsworth et al. (1978); de Wolff and van IJzendoorn (1997).117. Field (1985); Beebe and Lachman (1988).118. Fonagy et al. (1991b); Fonagy and Target (1997).119. Trevarthen (1993).120. Stern (1985).121. Beebe and Lachman (1994).122. Field (1985); Hofer (1984); Trvarthen (1993); Stern (1985).123. Hofer (1994).124. Lieberman (1997).125. Bauer et al. (1995); Bauer and Wewerka (1995); Fivush (1996).126. Main and Goldwyn (1998).127. Hesse (1996).128. Fonagy et al. (1997); Fonagy and Target (1997).129. Morton and Frith (1995).130. Main (1995).131. Main and Goldwyn (1998); Lichtenstein Phelps et al. (1998).132. M. Main (personal communication, 1990); Pearson et al. (1994).133. Pearson et al. (1994); Lichtenstein Phelps et al. (1998).134. Steele and Steele (1994); Sagi et al. (1997); Lyons-Ruth et al. (1990).135. Ainsworth et al. (1978).136. Spangler and Grossmann (1993).137. Ainsworth et al. (1978).138. Crowell et al. (1988); Beebe and Lachman (1988, 1994).139. Main (1995).140. Fonagy et al. (1997).141. Main and Goldwyn (1998).142. Bowlby (1969).143. Spangler and Grossmann (1993); Dozier et al. (1994).144. Fonagy et al. (1991b).145. Main (1995).146. van IJzendoorn and Bakermanns-Kranenburg (1996).147. Ogawa et al. (1997); E. Carlson (1998).148. Dozier et al. (1994).149. Wheeler et al. (1997); Damasio (1994); Schore (1994); Baron-Cohen (1995);
Tucker et al. (1995).
150. Singer and Salovey (1993); Neisser and Fivush (1994).151. Schacter (1996); Rubin (1987).152. Wheeler et al. (1997).153. Wheeler et al. (1997); Kinsbourne (1972).154. M. Main and Hesse (personal communication, 1999).155. Christianson (1992).156. Damasio (1994); Edelman (1992).157. Ochs and Capps (1996).158. Main (1996).159. Ainsworth et al. (1978).160. Main (1995).161. Fonagy et al. (1997).162. Aitken and Trevarthen (1997).163. Stern (1985).346 Notes to Chapter 3

164. Main (1991); Bowlby (1973).
165. Main (1991).166. Main and Goldwyn (1998).167. Main and Goldwyn (1998).168. Lyons-Ruth and Jacobwitz (1999); Hesse (1999).169. Schacter and Buckner (1998); NcNally et al. (1994).170. Bowers (1987).171. Hesse (1996).172. Bretherton (1992b); Walden (1991).173. Main and Solomon (1990).174. Main and Solomon (1990); Spangler et al. (1996).175. G. Liotti (1992); Main and Hesse (1990).176. Main and Hesse (1990); Hesse and Main (1999, in press).177. Main (1995); Hesse (1999).178. Lyons-Ruth et al. (1991); V. Carlson et al. (1989); Lyons-Ruth and
Jacobwitz (1999).
179. Main and Morgan (1996).180. Perry et al. (1995).181. Main and Hesse (1990).182. Ogawa et al. (1997); E. Carlson (1998).183. Lyons-Ruth et al. (1993), Ogawa et al. (1997), van IJzendoorn (in press),
and E. Carlson (1998).
184. Lyons-Ruth and Jacobwitz (1999).185. Siegel (1995a).186. Siegel (1996a).187. Main and Hesse (1999).188. van IJzendoorn (1995).189. Main and Goldwyn (1998).190. Main and Goldwyn (1998); Hesse (1996).191. Siegel (1996a).192. Hesse (1996); Main and Morgan (1996).193. Ainsworth and Eichberg (1991); Hesse (1999).194. Siegel (1995).195. Hesse and Main (1999).196. Lyons-Ruth et al. (1993); Cicchetti and Toth (1995); Yehuda and McFarlane
(1995); E. Carlson (1998).
197. Main and Hesse (1990).198. Hesse (1996).199. Siegel (1996).200. Main and Hesse (1990); Hesse and Main (1999, in press).201. Lyons-Ruth and Jacobwitz (1999).202. Schuengel et al. (in press); Main and Hesse (1990).203. Hesse and van IJzendoorn (1998).204. Siegel (1995~a); van der Kolk et al. (1996); Zeitlin and McNally (1991).205. Siegel (1996a).206. Perry et al. (1995).207. Lyons-Ruth and Jacobwitz (1999).208. Yehuda and McFarlane (1995).209. Lyons-Ruth and Jacobwitz (1999); Karr-Morse and Wiley (1997).210. Post and Weiss (1997).Notes to Chapter 3 347

Chapter 4
1. Bretherton (1992b); Walden (1991).
2. Bowers et al. (1993).3. Etcoff and Magee (1992); Ortony and Turner (1990).4. Kagan (1994b); Davidson (1992b); Dodge and Garber (1991); Holstege et al.
(1994).
5. LeDoux (1996); Harr‚ (1986).6. Brothers (1997).7. LeDoux (1996); Brothers (1997).8. Watt (1998); Stein and Trabasso (1992).9. Brothers (1997); Ciompi (1991); Harr‚ (1986).
10. LeDoux (1996).11. Ortony and Turner (1990).12. Ekman (1992b).13. Garber and Dodge (1991); Fox (1994a); Cicchetti et al. (1991).14. Dodge (1991, p. 159).15. Sroufe (1996, p. 15).16. Izard and Kobak (1991).17. Barbas (1995); LeDoux (1990).18. Rolls (1995); Barbas (1995); Lewis (1996).19. Edelman (1992).20. Davidson et al. (1990).21. Sroufe (1996).22. Thompson (1994).23. Davidson et al. (1990).24. Dawson (1994b); Heller (1993).25. Kagan (1994a).26. Dunn and Brown (1991).27. Kagan (1994).28. Izard (1991); M. Lewis and Haviland (1993).29. Darwin (1872/1965).30. Ekman (1992a).31. Izard (1992); Ekman (1992b).32. Doi (1973).33. Stern (1985).34. Sroufe (1996); Camras (1992).35. R. Feldman and Greenbaum (1997); Field et al. (1990); Winnicott (1965).36. Rubinow and Post (1992).37. M. S. George et al. (1997).38. Dawson (1994a); Field (1995); Lyons-Ruth et al. (1990).39. Schore (1998); LeDoux (1996).40. Halgren (1992).41. Allman and Brothers (1994).42. Porges et al. (1994).43. Price et al. (1994); Schore (1997).44. Porges et al. (1994).45. Watts (1998).46. Spence et al. (1996); M. D. Lewis (1995); Damasio (1994).47. Davis (1992).48. LeDoux et al. (1991).348 Notes to Chapter 4

49. Gazzaniga (1988); Crick (1994); Rolls (1995); Marcel and Bisach (1988);
Greenwald (1992).
50. Baddeley (1992,).51. Goldman-Rakic (1993).52. Crick (1994); Llinas (1990).53. Dennett (1991).54. Tononi and Edelman (1998).55. LeDoux (1996); Rolls (1995).56. Damasio (1994).57. James (1884); Panksepp (1982).58. Edelman (1992).59. Leichtman et al. (1992); McGaugh (1992).60. Damasio (1998).61. Main and Hesse (1990).62. Lyons-Ruth and Jacobwitz (1999).63. Allman and Brothers (1994).64. Pinker (1997).65. Thelen (1989).66. Damasio (1994).67. Damasio (1994).68. Schore (1994).69. Baron-Cohen (1995).70. Wheeler et al. (1997).71. Baron-Cohen (1995).72. LeDoux (1996); Rolls (1995).73. Brothers (1997).74. Izard (1991).75. Nobre et al. (1999, p. 12).76. Freedman et al. (1998).77. Mesulam (1998, p. 1013).78. Main (1991, 1995, 1996, in press).79. Hesse (1996).80. Watt (1998); LeDoux (1996).81. Schore (1994, 1997).82. Brothers (1997).83. Damasio (1994); Rolls (1996); Fuster (1985).84. Porges et al. (1994); Ehlers and Margraf (1987).85. Larsen et al. (1992).86. Schiff et al. (1992).87. Damasio (1994).88. Schore (1994).89. Damasio (1994).90. Gilligan (1996); Benenson (1996).91. Gilligan (1997).92. Brothers (1997).93. Brothers (1997).94. Brothers (1997); Ekman (1992a); Dawson (1994b).95. Adolphs et al. (1994); Hornak et al. (1996); Haxby et al. (1996).96. Schuman (1997).97. Ali and Cimino (1997); Ross (1984); Tucker (1981).Notes to Chapter 4 349

98. Porges et al. (1994).
99. Springer and Deutsch (1993); Nass and Koch (1991).
100. Otto et al. (1987).101. Davidson (1992a); Dawson (1994a).102. Ross et al. (1994).103. Schore (1997); Ross et al. (1994); Porges et al. (1994); Cutting (1992);
Wittling and Schweiger (1993).
104. Heller et al. (1995); Ross et al. (1994).105. Fox (1994b).106. Field (1994); Dawson (1994b); Calkins (1994).107. Dawson (1994b).108. Springer and Deutsch (1993).109. Springer and Deutsch (1993); Wittling and Roschmann (1993).110. Schore (1997).111. Halgren and Markinovic (1995).112. Ornstein (1997).113. M. D. Lewis (1995); Fox (1994b).114. Ross et al. (1994).115. Fonagy and Target (1997).116. Toth et al. (1997).117. Garber and Dodge (1991); Fox (1994a); Sroufe (1996).118. Sroufe (1996, p. 159).119. Calkins (1994).
Chapter 5
1. Trevarthen (1996).2. Pinker (1997).3. Eggermont (1998).4. Perner (1991); Eggermont (1998).5. Pinker (1997).6. Edelman (1992); Posner (1990); Perner (1991).7. Edelman (1992).8. Wheeler et al. (1997).9. Perner and Ruffman (1995).
10. Buckner (1996).11. Pinker (1997).12. Hamann and Squire (1997); Shevrin (1992).13. Trevarthen (1990b, p. 357).14. Trevarthen (1996).15. Trevarthen (1996, p. 583).16. M. Liotti and Tucker (1992); Trevarthen (1996).17. Tucker et al. (1995, pp. 233–234).18. Tucker et al. (1995, p. 222).19. Tucker et al. (1995, p. 223).20. Springer and Deutsch (1993); Zaidel et al. (1990).21. Springer and Deutsch (1993).22. Trevarthen (1996).23. Ornstein et al. (1979).24. Trevarthen (1996).350 Notes to Chapter 5

25. Ornstein (1997); Rotenberg (1994).
26. Gazzaniga et al. (1996).27. Gazzaniga (1996).28. Jaynes (1976); Joseph (1992).29. Damasio (1994).30. Johnson and Hugdahl (1991); Sergent et al. (1992).31. Semrud-Clikeman and Hynd (1990).32. Damasio (1994).33. Schore (1994).34. Zaidel et al. (1995).35. Schore (1997).36. Davidson (1992).37. Davidson et al. (1990).38. Trevarthen (1996).39. Ross et al. (1994).40. Ekman (1992a).41. Ali and Cimino (1997); Heller et al. (1995); Zaidel et al. (1995).42. Zaidel et al. (1995).43. Zaidel et al. (1990).44. Dawson (1994a); Field et al. (1995).45. Field (1995); Hossain et al. (1994); Palaez-Nougueras et al. (1994).46. Bavellier et al. (1998).47. Neville (1998); Neville and Bavellier (1998).48. Thatcher et al. (1987); Chiron et al. (1997).49. Schore (1997).50. Thatcher (1994, 1997); Thatcher et al. (1987).51. Haft and Slade (1989).52. Fonagy et al. (1991b, 1997); Fonagy and Target (1997).53. Fonagy and Target (1997); Fonagy et al. (1997).54. Aitken and Trevarthen (1997, pp. 653–654).55. Greenspan and Benderly (1997).56. Aitken and Trevarthen (1997, pp. 655, 664).57. Beebe and Lachman (1988).58. Springer and Deutsch (1993).59. Trevarthen (1996); Friede and Weinstock (1988).60. Springer and Deutsch (1993).61. Trevarthen (1996).62. Levy (1969).63. Trevarthen (1996).64. Levy (1969).65. Thatcher et al. (1987).66. C. A. Nelson and Bloom (1997).67. Pons (1996).68. Springer and Deutsch (1993).69. Hubel (1967).70. Schuman (1997).71. Bowlby (1988); Colin (1996).72. Merzenich et al. (1991).73. Post and Weiss (1997, p. 925).Notes to Chapter 5 351

74. Nass and Koch (1991); Wheeler et al. (1993); Gunnar (1992); Davidson et al.
(1990).
75. Davidson (1992a).76. Tucker et al. (1995).77. Kagan (1992).78. Levy (1969).79. Kelley et al. (1998).80. Schacter (1996, p. 141).81. Goldberg and Costa (1981).82. Edwards (1989).83. Zaidel et al. (1990).84. Aitken and Trevarthen (1997).85. Oznoff and Miller (1996).86. Fonagy and Target (1997, pp. 690–691).87. Sigman and Capps (1997).88. Baron-Cohen (1995).89. Fonagy and Target (1997).90. Fonagy and Target (1997).91. M. Main, personal communication (January, 1999).92. Hesse (1999).
Chapter 6
1. Morris (1989).2. Eggermont (1998).3. Perry et al. (1995); Horowitz (1987, 1991).4. Fuster (1989).5. van der Kolk et al. (1996).6. Skinner et al. (1992); Robertson and Combs (1995); Prigogine and Stengers
(1984); Taylor (1994).
7. van Pelt et al. (1994).8. Robertson and Combs (1995).9. Boldrini et al. (1998); Cicchetti and Rogosch (1997b).
10. Gleick (1987).11. Skinner et al. (1992).12. Doebeli (1993).13. Pinker (1997).14. Corner (1994).15. McClelland and Rumelhart (1986).16. Globus and Arpaia (1993); Jeffery and Reid (1997).17. Hagler and Goda (1998).18. Black (1998).19. Milner et al. (1998).20. Robertson and Combs (1995).21. Boldrini et al. (1998 p. 25).22. Globus and Arpaia (1993).23. Thelen (1989).24. Post and Weiss (1997, p. 911; emphasis added).25. Fogel et al. (1997).26. Cicchetti and Rogosch (1997a).352 Notes to Chapter 6

27. Fogel et al. (1997); Globus and Arpaia (1993); Chamberlain (1995); Jackson
(1991); March and Mulle (1998).
28. L. J. Cohen et al. (1997).29. Robertson and Combs (1995); Globus and Arpaia (1993).30. Aitken and Trevarthen (1997).31. Fonagy and Target (1997).32. Main and Hesse (1990).33. Beebe and Lachman (1988, 1994).34. M. D. Lewis (1995).35. Fogel et al. (1997); Fogel and Branco (1997).36. Schore (1997, p. 600).37. Shinbrot et al. (1993).38. Boldrini et al. (1998, p. 25).39. Otto et al. (1987); Coffey (1987); Rubinow and Post (1992); M. S. George et
al. (1997).
40. Hofer (1990, p. 74).41. Harter (1988); Harter et al. (1997).42. Harter et al. (1997).43. Sroufe (1996).44. Sroufe (1990).45. Harter et al. (1997).46. Harter et al. (1997).47. Harter et al. (1997).48. Yawkey and Johnson (1988); Fonagy and Target (1997); Harter et al. (1997).49. Noam and Fischer (1996).50. Cicchetti and Rogosch (1997a).51. O’Donohue (1997).52. Chamberlain (1995).
Chapter 7
1. Ciompi (1991).2. Sroufe (1996).3. Hofer (1994).4. Sroufe (1996).5. Tronick (1989); Kraemer (1992).6. Sroufe (1996).7. Lieberman (1993).8. Damasio (1998, p. 84).9. Rutter (1991); Calkins (1994); Cole et al. (1994); Feeney and Kirkpatrick
(1996); Fox et al. (1996).
10. Sroufe (1996); Schore (1994); Fox (1994a); Garber and Dodge (1991);
Cicchetti and Tucker (1994).
11. Cicchetti and Rogosch (1997b); Schore (1997).12. Post and Weiss (1997).13. Ogawa et al. (1997); E. Carlson (1998).14. Cole et al. (1994).15. Goleman (1995).16. Baxter et al. (1992).17. Fox (1994a); Garber and Dodge (1991); Schore (1994).Notes to Chapter 7 353

18. Kagan (1994a); Calkins and Fox (1994).
19. Sroufe (1996); Olds et al. (1998).20. Rolls (1995); Fox (1994a); Garber and Dodge (1991); Halgren and
Marinkovic (1995). See also Epstein (1995).
21. LeDoux (1990); Porges et al. (1994); Lewis (1997); Lyra and Winegar (1997).22. Dawson (1994b).23. Dawson (1994a).24. Stern (1985); Field (1994).25. Sroufe (1996).26. Schore (1996).27. Schore (1994).28. Schacter and Buckner (1998).29. Perry (1997); Post et al. (1998).30. LeDoux (1996).31. Sroufe (1996).32. Camras (1992).33. Malatesta-Magai (1991).34. Cassidy (1994); Dunn and Brown (1991).35. M. Lewis and Haviland (1993); Izard (1991).36. Goleman (1995).37. Schore (1994).38. Kihlstrom (1987).39. Tononi and Edelman (1998).40. Mesulam (1998); Peterson (1998); Shimamura (1995); Posner and Rothbart
(1998).
41. Nobre et al. (1999, p. 12).42. Dunn and Brown (1991).43. Metcalfe and Shimamura (1989).44. Edelman (1992).45. Malatesta-Magai (1991).46. LeDoux (1996).47. LeDoux (1996); Allman and Brothers (1994); Ekman (1992b); Etcoff and
Magee (1992); Johnson and Hugdahl (1991).
48. Harter et al. (1997).49. M. S. George et al. (1997); Rubinow and Post (1992).
Chapter 8
1. Hofer (1994).2. Sapolsky (1997).3. McCraty et al. (1998).4. Sroufe (1996).5. Schore (1994, 1996, 1997).6. Porges et al. (1994).7. Schore (1994).8. Schore (1997).9. Sroufe (1996).
10. Schore (1994).11. Schore (1994).12. Schore (1994).354 Notes to Chapter 8

13. Stern (1985).
14. Field (1985); Schore (1994).15. Schore (1996).16. Cassidy (1994).17. Cassidy (1994).18. Schore (1996, 1997).19. Siegel (1995b).20. Walden (1991).21. Pearson et al. (1994); Lichtenstein Phelps et al. (1998).22. Main and Goldwyn (1998).23. Edwards (1989).24. Edwards (1989).25. G. Liotti (1992).26. Siegel (1996b).27. Liu et al. (1997); Perry (1997); Hofer (1996).28. Post and Weiss (1997); Post et al. (1998).29. Bowlby (1980).
Chapter 9
1. Tucker et al. (1995, p. 214).2. Tucker et al. (1995).3. Trevarthen (1996).4. Trevarthen (1990a, p. 49).5. Tucker et al. (1995, p. 218).6. Wise et al. (1996).7. Calvin (1993).8. Mesulam (1998); Nobre et al. (1999).9. van Ooyen and van Pelt (1994, pp. 245, 246).
10. Freeman (1994).11. Trevarthen (1996, pp. 571–572; emphasis in original).12. Mesulam (1998); Posner et al. (1997).13. Damasio (1998, p. 83).14. Benes (1994).15. Benes (1998, p. 1489).16. Yawkey and Johnson (1988).17. Harter et al. (1997).18. Baynes et al. (1998); Trevarthen (1990a, 1990b).19. Ciompi (1991).20. Main and Goldwyn (1998).21. Fonagy and Target (1997).22. Pearson et al. (1994, p. 360).23. Main and Goldwyn (1998).24. Lichtenstein Phelps et al. (1998).25. Harter et al. (1997).26. Harter et al. (1997).27. Sroufe et al. (1990); Feeney and Kirkpatrick (1996); Howes et al. (1998).28. Cicchetti and Rogosch (1997a).29. Ogawa et al. (1997 p. 871), paraphrasing Loevinger (1976).30. Ogawa et al. (1997, pp. 871–872).Notes to Chapter 9 355

31. Schore (1997, p. 607).
32. Main (1991).33. Schore (1997).34. G. Liotti (1991).35. Ogawa et al. (1997); E. Carlson (1998).36. Yehuda and McFarlane (1995).37. Ogawa et al. (1997, p. 856).38. Putnam (1989); D. O. Lewis and Putnam (1996); Bernstein and Putnam
(1986); Spiegel (1996); Waller et al. (1996); Putnam (1997).
39. American Psychiatric Association (1994).40. Krystal et al. (1994).41. Corner (1994); Mesulam (1998).42. Ross (1996).43. Siegel (1996a).44. A quote from the bulletin board of the First Presbyterian Church Preschool,
Los Angeles.
45. Csikszentmihalyi (1990).46. Snow (1990); Wolf (1990); Haden et al. (1997); K. Nelson (1989).47. Wolf (1990 p. 185).48. Wolf (1990, p. 183).49. Haden et al. (1997); Snow (1990); Wolf (1990); Fivush (1996).50. Hilgard (1977).51. Schacter (1996).52. Putnam (1989).53. Vandenberg (1998, pp. 265, 266).54. Vygotsky (1934/1986).55. Gazzaniga et al. (1996).56. Schacter (1996); Gazzaniga (1995).57. Bost et al. (1998); Bagwell et al. (1998); Howes et al. (1994a, 1994b); Booth
et al. (1998); Sroufe et al. (1990).
58. Sroufe et al. (1990).59. Elder (1998, p. 9).60. Pinker (1997); Brothers (1997).61. Edelman (1992).62. Fuster (1989); Edelman (1992).63. Tulving et al. (1994).64. Wheeler et al. (1997).65. Winson (1993).66. Milner et al. (1998).67. Trevarthen (1990b).68. Cicchetti and Rogosch (1997a).69. Beebe and Lachman (1994).70. Ross (1996).71. Sroufe (1996, p. 17).356 Notes to Chapter 9

ReferencesReferences
/fl2rt
References
Abel, T., Martin, K. C., Bartsch, D., & Kandel, E. R. (1998). Memory suppressor
genes: Inhibitory constraints on the storage of long-term memory. Science, 279,
338–341.
Adam, K. S., Sheldon-Keller, A. E., & West, M. (1996). Attachment organization and
history of suicidal behavior in adolescents. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 674, 264–292.
Adolphs, R., Tranel, D., Damasio, H., & Damasio, A. (1994). Impaired recognition
of emotion in facial expressions following bilateral damage to the humanamygdala. Nature, 372, 669–672.
Ainsworth, M. D. S., Blehar, M. C., Waters, E., & Wall, S. (1978). Patterns of attach-
ment: A psychological study of the Strange Situation. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Ainsworth, M. D. S., & Eichberg, C. (1991). Effects on infant–mother attachment of
mother’s unresolved loss of an attachment figure, or other traumatic experience.In C. M. Parkes, J. Stevenson-Hinde, & P. Marris (Eds.), Attachment across the
life cycle (pp. 160–186). London: Routledge.
Aitken, K. J., & Trevarthen, C. (1997). Self–other organization in human psychologi -
cal development. Development and Psychopathology, 9, 653–678.
Ali, N., & Cimino, C. R. (1997). Hemispheric lateralization of perception and mem -
ory for emotional verbal stimuli in normal individuals. Neuropsychology, 11,
114–125.
Allen, J. P., Hauser, S. T., & Borman-Spurrell, E. (1996). Attachment theory as a
framework for understanding sequelae of severe adolescent psychopathology:An eleven-year follow-up study. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
64,254–263.
Allman, J., & Brothers, L. (1994). Faces, fear and the amygdala. Nature, 372, 613–
614.
American Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic and statistical manual of men -
tal disorders (4th ed.). Washington, DC: Author.
Andreasen, N. C. (1997). Linking mind and brain in the study of mental illnesses: A
project for a scientific psychopathology. Science, 275, 1586–1593.
Andreasen, N. C., O’Leary, D. S., Arndt, S., Cizaldo, T., Hurtig, R., Rezai, K.,
Watkins, G. L., Ponto, L. L. B., & Hichwa, R. D. (1995a). Short-term and long-
357

term verbal memory: A positron emission tomography study. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences USA, 92, 5111–5115.
Andreasen, N. C., O’Leary, D. S., Arndt, S., Cizaldo, T., Hurtig, R., Rezal, K.,
Watkins, G. L., Ponto, L. L. B., & Hichwa, R. D. (1995b). Remembering thepast: Two facets of episodic memory explored with positron emission tomogra -
phy. American Journal of Psychiatry, 152, 1576–1585.
Atkinson, L., & Zucker, K. J. (Eds.). (1997). Attachment and psychopathology. New
York: Guilford Press.
Bachevelier, J. (1992). Cortical versus limbic immaturity: Relationship to infantile
amnesia. In M. R. Gunnar & C. A. Nelson (Eds.), Minnesota Symposia on
Child Psychology: Vol. 24. Developmental Behavioral Neuroscience (pp. 129–
154). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Baddeley, A. (1992). Working memory. Science, 255, 556–559.
Baddeley, A. (1994). The remembered self and the enacted self. In U. Neisser & R.
Fivush (Eds.), The remembering self: Construction and accuracy in the self-nar -
rative (pp. 236–242). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Bagwell, C. L., Newcomb, A. F., & Bukowski, W. M. (1998). Preadolescent friend -
ship and peer rejection as predictors of adult adjustment. Child Development,
69,140–153.
Bailey, C. H., & Kandel, E. R. (1995). Molecular and structural mechanisms underly -
ing long-term memory. In M. S. Gazzaniga (Ed.), The cognitive neurosciences
(pp. 19–36). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bakermans-Kranenburg, M. J., Juffer, F., & van IJzendoorn, M. H. (1998). Interven-
tion with video feedback and attachment discussions: Does type of maternalinsecurity make a difference? Infant Mental Health Journal, 19, 202–219.
Bakermans-Kranenburg, M. J., & van IJzendoorn, M. H. (1993). A psychometric
study of the Adult Attachment Interview: Reliability and discriminant validity.Developmental Psychology, 29, 870–879.
Barbas, H. (1995). Anatomic basis of cognitive–emotional interactions in the primate
prefrontal cortex. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 19, 499–510.
Barnes, C. A., Erickson, C. A., Davis, S., & McNaughton, B. L. (1995). Hippocam-
pal synaptic enhancement as a basis for learning and memory: A selected reviewof current evidence from behaving animals. In J. L. McGaugh, N. M.Weinberger, & G. Lynch (Eds.), Brain and memory: Modulation and mediation
of neuroplasticity (pp. 259–276). New York: Oxford University Press
Baron-Cohen, S. (1995). Mindblindness: An essay on autism and theory of mind.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Baron-Cohen, S., & Ring, H. (1994). A model of the mind-reading system: Neuro -
psychological and neurobiological perspectives. In P. Mitchell & C. Lewis
(Eds.), Origins of an understanding of mind (pp. 183–207). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Bartlett, F. C. (1932). Remembering: A study in experimental and social psychology.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Bauer, P. J. (1996). What do infants recall of their lives?: Memory for specific events
by one- to two-year-olds. American Psychologist, 51, 29–41.
Bauer, P. J., & Dow, G. A. (1994). Episodic memory in sixteen- and twenty-month-
old children: Specifics are generalized but not forgotten. Developmental Psy -
chology, 30, 403–417.
Bauer, P. J., Hertsgaard, L. A., & Dow, G. A. (1994). After eight months have passed:
Long-term recall of events by one- and two-year-old children. Memory, 2, 353–
382.
Bauer, P. J., Hertsgaard, L. A., & Wewerka, S. S. (1995). Effects of experience and
reminding on long-term recall in infancy: Remembering not to forget. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 59, 260–298.358 References

Bauer, P. J., Kroupina, M. G., Schwade, J. A., Dropik, P. L., & Saeger Wewerka, S.
(1998). If memory serves, will language? Later verbal accessibility of early mem -
ories. Development and Psychopathology, 10, 655–680.
Bauer, P. J., & Wewerka, S. S. (1995). One- to two-year-olds’ recall of events: The
more expressed, the more impressed. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology,
59,475–496.
Baumrind, D. (1993). The average expectable environment is not good enough: A
response to Scarr. Child Development, 64, 1299–1317.
Bavellier, D., Corina, D. P., & Neville, H. J. (1998). Brain and language: A perspec -
tive from sign language. Neuron, 21, 275–278.
Baxter, L. R., Schwartz, J. M., Bergman, K. S., Szuba, M. P., Guze, B. H., Mazziotta,
J. C., Alazraki, A., Selin, C. E., Fering, H. K., & Munford, P. (1992). Caudateglucose metabolic rate changes with both drug and behavior therapy for obses -
sive–compulsive disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 49, 681–689.
Baynes, K., Eliassen, J. C., Lutsep, H. L., & Gazzaniga, M. S. (1998). Modular orga -
nization of cognitive systems masked by interhemispheric integration. Science,
280, 902–905.
Bechara, A., Damasio, A. R., Damasio, H., & Anderson, S. W. (1994). Insensitivity
to future consequences following damage to human prefrontal cortex. Cogni -
tion, 50, 7–15.
Beebe, B., & Lachman, F. M. (1988). Mother–infant mutual influence and precursors
of psychic structure. In A. Goldberg (Ed.), Progress in self psychology (Vol. 3,
pp. 3–25). Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.
Beebe, B., & Lachman, F. M. (1994). Representation and internalization in infancy:
Three principles of salience. Psychoanalytic Psychology, 11, 127–166.
Belsky, J., & Cassidy, J. (1994). Attachment : Theory and evidence. In M. Rutter &
D. F. Hay (Eds.), Development through life: A handbook for clinicians (pp.
373–402). Oxford: Blackwell.
Benedersky, M., & Lewis, M. (1994). Environmental risks, biological risks, and
developmental outcome. Developmental Psychology, 30, 484–494.
Benenson, J. F. (1996). Gender differences in the development of relationships. In G.
G. Noam & K. W. Fischer (Eds.), Development and vulnerability in close rela-
tionships (pp. 263–286). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Benes, F. M. (1994). Development of the corticolimbic system. In G. Dawson & K.
W. Fischer (Eds.), Human behavior and the developing brain (pp. 176–206).
New York: Guilford Press.
Benes, F. M. (1998). Human brain growth spans decades. American Journal of Psy -
chiatry, 155, 1489.
Benoit, D., & Parker, K. C. H. (1994). Stability and transmission of attachment
across three generations. Child Development, 65, 1444–1456.
Benoit, D., Zeanah, C. H., Boucher, C., Minde, K. K. (1992). Sleep disorders in early
childhood: Association with insecure maternal attachment. Journal of the Amer -
ican Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 31, 86–93.
Bernstein, E., & Putnam, R. (1986). Development, reliability and validity of a disso -
ciation scale. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 174, 727–735.
Bjork, R. (1989). Retrieval inhibition as an adaptive mechanism in human memory.
In H. L. Roediger & F. I. M. Craik (Eds.), Varieties of memory and conscious -
ness: Essays in honor of Endel Tulving (pp. 283–288). Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Black, I. B. (1998). Genes, brain, and mind: The evolution of cognition. Neuron, 20,
1073–1080.
Boldrini, M., Placidi, G. P. A., & Marazziti, D. (1998). Applications of chaos theories
to psychiatry: A review and future perspectives. International Journal of Neuro -
psychiatric Medicine, 3, 22–29.
Booth, C. L., Rubin, K. H., & Rose-Krasnor, L. (1998). Perceptions of emotionalReferences 359

support from mother and friend in middle childhood: Links with social-emo -
tional adaptation and preschool attachment security. Child Development, 69,
427–442.
Bost, K. K., Vaughn, B. E., Washington, W. N., Cielinski, K. L., & Bradbard, M. R.
(1998). Social competence, social support, and attachment: Demarcation ofconstruct domains, measurement, and paths of influence for preschool childrenattending Head Start. Child Development, 69, 192–218.
Bouchard, T. J. (1994). Genes, environment, and personality. Science, 264, 1700–
1701.
Bower, G. H. (1987). Commentary on mood and memory. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 25, 443–456.
Bower, G. H., & Sivers, H. (1998). Cognitive impact of traumatic events. Develop -
ment and Psychopathology, 10, 625–654.
Bowers, D., Bauer, R. M., & Heilman, K. M. (1993). The nonverbal affect lexicon:
Theoretical perspectives from neuropsychological studies of affect perception.Neuropsychology, 7, 433–444.
Bowlby, J. (1969). Attachment and loss: Vol. 1. Attachment. New York: Basic Books.
Bowlby, J. (1973). Attachment and loss: Vol. 2. Separation and anger. New York:
Basic Books.
Bowlby, J. (1980). Attachment and loss: Vol. 3. Loss: Sadness and depression. New
York: Basic Books.
Bowlby, J. (1988). A secure base: Parent–child attachment and healthy human devel-
opment. New York: Basic Books.
Bremner, J. D., & Narayan, M. (1998). The effects of stress on memory and the hip-
pocampus throughout the life cycle: Implications for childhood developmentand aging. Development and Psychopathology, 10, 871–888.
Bremner, J. D., Randall, P., Scott, T. M., Bronen, R. A., Seibyl, J. P., Southwick, S.
M., Delaney, R. C., McCarthy, G., Charney, D. S., & Innis, R. B. (1995). M-based measures of hippocampal volume in patients with PTSD. American Jour-
nal of Psychiatry, 152, 973–981.
Bretherton, I. (1992a). The origins of attachment theory: John Bowlby and Mary
Ainsworth. Developmental Psychology, 28, 759–775.
Bretherton, I. (1992b). Social referencing, intentional communication, and the inter -
facing of minds in infancy. In S. Feinman (Ed.), Social referencing and the social
construction of reality in infancy (pp. 57–77). New York: Plenum Press.
Bretherton, I. (1993). From dialogue to internal working models: The co-construction
of self in relationships. In C. A. Nelson (Ed.), Minnesota Symposia on Child
Psychology: Vol. 26. Memory and affect in development (pp. 237–264).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bretherton, I. (1996). Internal working models of attachment relationships as related
to resilient coping. In G. G. Noam & K. W. Fischer (Eds.), Development and
vulnerability in close relationships (pp. 3–28). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Britton, B. K., & Pellegrini, A. D. (1990). Narrative thought and narrative language.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Broadwell, R. D. (Ed). (1995). Decade of the brain (Vol. 1). Washington, DC: U.S.
Government Printing Office.
Brodsky, M., & Lombroso, P. J. (1998). Molecular mechanisms of developmental dis -
orders. Development and Psychopathology, 10, 1–20.
Brothers, L. (1997). Friday’s footprint: How society shapes the human mind. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Bruner, J. (1986). Actual minds, possible worlds. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univer -
sity Press.
Bruner, J. (1990). Acts of meaning. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Buckner, R. L. (1996). Beyond HERA: Contributions of specific prefrontal brain
areas to long-term memory retrieval. Psychonomic Bulletin, 3, 149–158.360 References

Buckner, R. L., Petersen, S. E., Ojemann, J. G., Miezin, F. M., Squire, L. R., &
Raichle, M. E. (1995). Functional anatomical studies of explicit and implicitmemory retrieval tasks. Journal of Neuroscience, 15, 12–29.
Butterfield, P. M. (1996). The Partners in Parenting Education Program: A new
option for parent education. Zero to Three, 17, 3–10.
Calkins, S. D. (1994). Origins and outcomes of individual differences in emotion reg -
ulation. In N. A. Fox (Ed), The development of emotion regulation: Biological
and behavioral considerations. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child
Development, 59 (2–3, Serial No. 240), 53–72.
Calkins, S. D., & Fox, N. A. (1994). Individual differences in the biological aspects
of temperament. In J. E. Bates & T. D. Wachs (Eds.), Temperament: Individual
differences at the interface of biology and behavior (pp. 199–217). Washington,
DC: American Psychological Association.
Calvin, W. H. (1993). The unitary hypothesis: A common neural circuitry for novel
manipulations, language, plan-ahead, and throwing? In K. R. Gibson & T.Ingold (Eds.), Tools, language and cognition in human evolution (pp. 230–250).
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Camras, L. A. (1992). Expressive development and basic emotions. Cognition and
Emotion, 3, 269–283.
Carlson, E. A. (1998). A prospective longitudinal study of disorganized/disoriented
attachment. Child Development, 69, 1107–1128.
Carlson, E., & Sroufe, L. A. (1995). Contribution of attachment theory to develop-
mental psychopathology. In D. Cicchetti & D. J. Cohen (Eds.), Developmental
psychopathology: Vol. 1. Theory and methods (pp. 581–617). New York: Wiley.
Carlson, V., Cicchetti, D., Barnett, D., & Braunwald, K. (1989). Disorganized/disori-
ented attachment relationships in maltreated infants. Developmental Psychol-
ogy, 25, 525–531.
Carnegie Task Force on Meeting the Needs of Young Children. (1994). Starting
points: Meeting the needs of our youngest children. New York: Carnegie Corpo-
ration of New York.
Carter, C. S., Krener, P., Chaderjan, M., Northcutt, C., & Wolfe, V. (1995). Asym-
metrical visual–spatial attentional performance in ADHD: Evidence for a righthemisphere deficit. Biological Psychiatry, 37, 789–797.
Cassidy, J. (1994). Emotion regulation: Influences of attachment relationships. In N.
Fox (Ed.), Biological and behavioral foundations of emotion regulation. Mono -
graphs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 59 (2–3, Serial No.
240), 228–249.
Cassidy, J., & Shaver, P. R. (Eds.). (1999). Handbook of attachment: Theory,
research, and clinical applications. New York: Guilford Press.
Ceci, S., & Bruch, M. (1993). Suggestibility of the child witness: A historical review
and synthesis. Psychological Bulletin, 113, 403–439.
Chamberlain, L. (1995). Strange attractors in patterns of family interaction. In R.
Robertson & A. Combs (Eds.), Chaos theory in psychology and the life sciences
(pp. 267–273). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Chiron, C., Jambaque, I., Nabbot, R., Lounes, R., Syrota, A., & Dulac, O. (1997).
The right brain is dominant in human infants. Brain, 120, 1057–1065.
Christianson, S. A. (Ed.). (1992). Handbook of emotion and memory. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Christianson, S. A., & Lindholm, T. (1998). The fate of traumatic memories in child -
hood and adulthood. Development and Psychopathology, 10, 761–780.
Cicchetti, D., Ganiban, J., & Barnett, D. (1991). Contributions from the study of
high-risk populations to understanding emotion regulation. In J. Garber & K.A. Dodge (Eds.), The development of emotion regulation and dysregulation (pp.
15–48). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Cicchetti, D., & Lynch, M. (1993). Toward an ecological/transactional model ofReferences 361

community violence and child maltreatment: Consequences for children’s devel -
opment. Psychiatry, 53, 96–118.
Cicchetti, D., & Rogosch, F. A. (1997a). The role of self-organization in the promo -
tion of resilience in maltreated children. Development and Psychopathology, 9,
797–816.
Cicchetti, D., & Rogosch, F. A. (Eds.). (1997b). Self-organization [Special issue].
Development and Psychopathology, 9 (4).
Cicchetti, D., & Toth, S. (1995). A developmental psychology perspective on child
abuse and neglect. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry, 34, 541–565.
Cicchetti, D., & Toth, S. (Eds.). (1998). Risk, trauma, and memory [Special issue].
Development and Psychopathology, 10 (4).
Cicchetti, D., & Tucker, D. (1994). Development and self-regulatory structures of the
mind. Development and Psychopathology, 6, 533–549.
Ciompi, L. (1991). Affects as central organising and integrating factors: A new
psychosocial/biological model of the psyche. British Journal of Psychiatry, 159,
97–105.
Coe, C. L., Lubach, G. R., Schneider, M. L., Dierschke, D. J., & Ershler, W. B.
(1992). Early rearing conditions alter immune responses in the developinginfant primate. Pediatrics, 90, 505–509.
Coffey, C. E. (1987). Cerebral laterality and emotion: The neurology of depression.
Comprehensive Psychiatry, 28, 197–219.
Cohen, J. (1996). Does nature drive nurture? Science, 273, 577–578.
Cohen, L. J., Stein, D., Galynker, E., & Hollander, E. (1997). Towards an integration
of psychological and biological models of obsessive–compulsive disorder: Phylo-genetic considerations. International Journal of Neuropsychiatric Medicine, 2,
26–44.
Cohler, B. J. (1982). Personal narrative and the life course. In P. B. Bates & O. G.
Brim (Eds.), Life-span development and behavior (Vol. 4, pp. 205–241). New
York: Academic Press.
Cohn, D. A., Cowan, P. A., Cowan, C. P., & Pearson, J. (1992). Mothers’ and
fathers’ working models of childhood attachment relationships, parenting styles,and child behavior. Development and Psychopathology, 4, 417–431.
Cole, P. M., Michael, M. K., & O’Donnell-Teti, L. (1994). The development of emo -
tion regulation and dysregulation: A clinical perspective. In N. A. Fox (Ed.),
The development of emotion regulation: Biological and behavioral consider -
ations. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 59 (2–3,
Serial No. 240), 250–283.
Coles, R. (1989). The call of stories: Teaching and the moral imagination. Boston:
Houghton-Mifflin.
Colin, V. L. (1996). Human attachment. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Constantino, J. N. (1996). Intergenerational aspects of the development of aggres -
sion: A preliminary report. Journal of Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics,
17,176–182.
Corner, M. A. (1994). Reciprocity of structure–function relations in developing neu -
ral networks: The odyssey of a self-organizing brain through research fads, fal -
lacies and prospects. Progress in Brain Research, 102, 3–32.
Cowan, P. A., Cohn, D. A., Cowan, C. P., & Pearson, J. L. (1996). Parents’ attach -
ment histories and children’s externalizing and internalizing behaviors:
Exploring family systems models of linkage. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 64, 53–63.
Crick, F. (1994). The astonishing hypothesis. New York: Scribners.
Crittenden, P. M. (1985). Maltreated infants: Vulnerability and resilience. Journal of
Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 26, 85–96.362 References

Crittenden, P. M., Partridge, M. F., & Clausen, A. H. (1991). Family patterns of rela -
tionship in normative and dysfunctional families. Development and Psychopath -
ology, 3, 491–513.
Crowell, J. A., & Feldman, S. S. (1995). A review of adult attachment measures:
Implications for theory and research. Social Development, 4, 294–327.
Crowell, J. A., Feldman, S. S., & Ginsberg, N. (1988). Assessment of mother–child
interaction in preschoolers with behavior problems. Journal of the American
Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 27, 303–311.
Crowell, J. A., O’Connor, E., Wollmers, G., Sprafkin, J., & Rao, U. (1992). Mothers’
conceptualizations of parent–child relationships: Relation to mother–child inter -
action and child behavior problems. Development and Psychopathology, 3,
431–444.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990). Flow. New York: HarperCollins.
Cutting, J. (1992). The role of the right hemisphere in psychiatric disorders. British
Journal of Psychiatry, 160, 583–588.
Damasio, A. R. (1994). Descartes’ error: Emotion, reason, and the human brain.
New York: Grosset/Putnam.
Damasio, A. R. (1998). Emotion in the perspective of an integrated nervous system.
Brain Research Reviews, 26, 83–86.
Darwin, C. (1965). The expression of the emotions in man and animals. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press. (Original work published 1872)
Davidson, R. J. (1992a). Anterior cerebral asymmetry and the nature of emotion.
Brain and Cognition, 20, 125–151.
Davidson, R. J. (1992b). Prolegomenon to the structure of emotion: Gleanings from
neuropsychology. Cognition and Emotion, 6, 245–268.
Davidson, R. J., Ekman, P., Saron, C., Senulis, J., & Friesen, W. (1990). Approach–
withdrawal and cerebral asymmetry: I. Emotion expression and brain physiol-ogy. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 58, 330–341.
Davis, M. (1992). The role of the amygdala in fear and anxiety. Annual Review of
Neuroscience, 15, 353–375.
Dawson, G. (1994a). Frontal electroencephalographic correlates of individual differ-
ences in emotion expression in infants: A brain systems perspective on emotion.In N. A. Fox (Ed.), The development of emotion regulation: Biological andbehavioral considerations. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child
Development, 59 (2–3, Serial No. 240), 135–151.
Dawson, G. (1994b). Development of emotional expression and emotion regulation
in infancy. Contributions of the frontal lobe. In G. Dawson & K. W. Fischer(Eds.), Human behavior and the developing brain (pp. 346–379). New York:
Guilford Press.
Dawson, G., & Fischer, K. W. (Eds). (1994). Human behavior and the developing
brain. New York: Guilford Press.
DeHass, M., Bakermans-Kranenburg, M., & van IJzendoorn, M. H. (1994). The
Adult Attachment Interview and questionnaires for attachment style, tempera -
ment and memories of parental behavior. Journal of Genetic Psychology, 155,
471–486.
Dennett, D. C. (1991). Consciousness explained. Boston: Little, Brown.
D’Esposito, M., Detre, J., Alsop, D. Shin, R., Atlas, S., & Grossman, M. (1995). The
neural basis of the central executive system of working memory. Nature, 378,
279–281.
de Wolff, M. S., & van IJzendoorn, M. H. (1997). Sensitivity and attachment: A
meta-analysis of parental antecedents of infant attachment. Child Development,
68,571–591.
Diamond, D. M., & Rose, G. (1994). Stress impairs LTP and hippocampal-dependent
memory. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 746, 411–414.References 363

Dias, R., Robbins, T. W., & Roberts, A. C. (1996). Dissociation in prefrontal cortex
of affective and attentional shifts. Nature, 380, 69–72.
Dodge, K. A. (1991). Emotion and social information processing. In J. Garber & K.
A. Dodge (Eds.), The development of emotion regulation and dysregulation (pp.
159– 181). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Dodge, K. A. (1993). Social-cognitive mechanisms in the development of conduct
disorder and depression. Annual Review of Psychology, 44, 559–584.
Dodge, K. A., & Garber, J. (1991). Domains of emotion regulation. In J. Garber &
K. A. Dodge (Eds.), The development of emotion regulation and dysregulation
(pp. 3–14). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Doebeli, M. (1993). The evolutionary advantage of controlled chaos. Proceedings of
the Royal Society of London: Series B. Biological Sciences, 254, 281–285.
Doi, T. (1973). The anatomy of dependence. Tokyo: Kodansha International Press.
Dozier, M., Cue, K. L., & Barnett, L. (1994). Clinicians as caregivers: Role of attach -
ment organization in treatment. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
62,793–800.
Dozier, M., & Kobak, R. R. (1992). Psychophysiology in attachment interviews: con -
verging evidence for deactivating strategies. Child Development, 63, 1473–
1480.
Dunn, J. (1996). The Emanuel Miller Memorial Lecture 1995. Children’s relation -
ships: Bridging the divide between cognitive and social development. Journal of
Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 37, 508–518.
Dunn, J., & Brown, J. (1991). Relationships, talk about feelings, and the develop-
ment of affect regulation in early childhood. In J. Garber & K. A. Dodge (Eds.),The development of emotion regulation and dysregulation (pp. 89–110). Cam-
bridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Dunn, J., & McGuire, S. (1994). Young children’s nonshared experiences: A sum-
mary of studies in Colorado and Cambridge. In E. M. Hetherington, D. Reiss,& R. Plomin (Eds.), Separate social worlds of siblings: The impact of nonshared
environment on development (pp. 111–128). Hillsdale, NJ: Erbaum.
Durlak, J. A., & Wells, A. M. (1997). Primary prevention mental health programs for
children and adolescents: A meta-analytic review. American Journal of Commu-
nity Psychology, 25, 115–152.
Eccles, J. C. (1990). A unitary hypothesis of mind–brain interaction in the cerebral
cortex. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London: Series B. Biological Sci -
ences, 240, 433–451.
Edelman, G. (1992). Bright air, brilliant fire. New York: Basic Books.
Edwards, B. (1989). Drawing on the right side of the brain (rev. ed.). New York:
Tarcher/Putnam.
Eggermont, J. J. (1998). Is there a neural code? Neuroscience and Biobehavioral
Reviews, 22, 355–370.
Ehlers, A., & Margraf, J. (1987). Anxiety induced by false heart rate feedback in
patients with panic disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 26, 1–11.
Eiden, R. D., Teti, D. M., & Corns, K. M. (1995). Maternal working models of
attachment, marital adjustment and the parent–child relationship. Child Devel -
opment, 66, 1504–1518.
Eisenberg, L. (1995). The social construction of the human brain. American Journal
of Psychiatry, 152, 1563–1575.
Ekman, P. (1992a). Facial expressions of emotion: New findings, new questions. Psy-
chological Science, 3, 34–38.
Ekman, P. (1992b). An argument for basic emotions. Cognition and Emotion, 6,
169–200.
Elder, G. H. (1998). The life course as developmental theory. Child Development, 69,
1–12.
Emde, R. N. (1990). Mobilizing fundamental modes of development: Empathic avail -364 References

ability and therapeutic action. Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Associa -
tion, 38, 881–913.
Emde, R. N., Zeynep, B., Clyman, R. B., & Oppenheim, D. (1991). The moral self of
infancy: Affective core and procedural knowledge. Developmental Review, 11,
251–270.
Epstein, J. (1995, December 19). Emotional processes (Grand Rounds). The Toronto
Hospital, Toronto, Canada.
Erickson, M. F., Korfmacher, J., & Egeland, B. (1992). Attachments past and present:
Implications for therapeutic intervention with mother–infant dyads. Development
and Psychopathology, 4, 495–507.
Etcoff, N., & Magee, J. (1992). Categorical perception of facial expressions. Cogni -
tion, 44, 227–240.
Fagot, B. I., & Pears, K. C. (1996). Changes in attachment during the third year:
Consequences and predictions. Development and Psychopathology, 8, 325–344.
Feeney, B. C., & Kirkpatrick, L. A. (1996). Effects of adult attachment and presence
of romantic partners on physiological responses to stress. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 70, 255–270.
Feldman, D. E., & Knudsen, E. I. (1998). Experience-dependent plasticity and the
maturation of glutamatergic synapses. Neuron, 20, 1067–1071.
Feldman, R., & Greenbaum, C. W. (1997). Affect regulation and synchrony in
mother–infant play as precursors to the development of symbolic competence.Infant Mental Health Journal, 18, 4–23.
Felitti, V. J., Anda, R. F., Nordenberg, D., Williamson, D. F., Spitz, A. M., Edwards,
V., Koss, M. P., & Marks, J. S. (1998). Relationship of childhood abuse andhousehold dysfunction to many of the leading causes of death in adults: TheAdverse Childhood Experiences (ACE) Study. American Journal of Preventive
Medicine, 14, 245–258.
Field, T. (1985). Attachment as psychobiological attunement: Being on the same
wavelength. In M. Reite & T. Field (Eds.), The psychobiology of attachment
and separation (pp. 415–454). Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
Field, T. (1994). The effects of mother’s physical and emotional unavailability on
emotion regulation. In N. A. Fox. (Ed.), The development of emotion regula-tion: Biological and behavioral considerations. Monographs of the Society for
Research in Child Development, 59 (2–3, Serial No. 240), 208–227.
Field, T. (1995). Infants of depressed mothers. Infant Behavior and Development, 18,
1–13.
Field, T., Fox, N. A., Pickens, J., & Nawrocki, T. (1995). Relative right frontal EEG
activation in 3- to 6-month-old infants of “depressed” mothers. Developmental
Psychology, 31, 358–363.
Field, T., Healy, B., Goldstein, S., & Gutherz, M. (1990). Behavior state matching in
mother–infant interactions of non- depressed versus dep ressed moth er–infant
dyads. Developmental Psychology, 26, 7–14.
Fink, G. R., Markowowitsch, H. J., Reinkemeier, M., Bruckbauer, T., Kessler, J., &
Wolf-Dieter, H. (1996). Cerebral representation of one’s own past: Neural net -
works involved in autobiographical memory. Journal of Neuroscience, 16,
4275–4282.
Fivush, R. (1996). Constructing narrative, emotion, and self in parent–child conversa -
tions about the past. In U. Neisser & R. Fivush (Eds.), The remembering self:
Construction and accuracy in the self-narrative (pp. 136–157). Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Fivush, R. (1998). Children’s recollections of traumatic and nontraumatic events.
Development and Psychopathology, 10, 699–716.
Fivush, R., & Hudson, J. A. (Eds.). (1990). Knowing and remembering in young chil -
dren. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Flavell, J. H., Green, F. L., & Flavell, E. R. (1986). Development of knowledge aboutReferences 365

the appearance–reality distinction. Monographs of the Society for Research in
Child Development, 51 (1–68, Serial No. 212).
Flavell, J. H., Miller, P. H., & Miller, S. A. (1993). Cognitive development (3rd ed.).
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Flor-Henry, P., & Gruzelier, J. (Eds.). (1983). Laterality and psychopathology. New
York: Elsevier Science.
Fogel, A., & Branco, A. U. (1997). Metacommunication as a source of indeterminism
in relationship development. In A. Fogel, M. C. D. P. Lyra, & J. Valsiner (Eds.),Dynamics and indeterminism in developmental and social processes (pp. 65–
92). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Fogel, A., Lyra, M. C. D. P., & Valsiner, J. (Eds.). (1997). Dynamics and
indeterminism in developmental and social processes. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Fonagy, P. (1998). Early influences on development and social inequalities: Paper for
Sir Donald Acheson’s independent inquiry into inequalities in health. Unpub -
lished manuscript.
Fonagy, P., Leigh, T., Steele, M., Steele, H., Kennedy, G., Mattoon, M., Target, M., &
Gerber, A. (1996). The relation of attachment status, psychiatric classificationand response to psychotherapy. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
64,22–31.
Fonagy, P., Steele, H., & Steele, M. (1991a). Maternal representations of attachment
during pregnancy predict the organization of infant–mother attachment at oneyear of age. Child Development, 62, 891–905.
Fonagy, P., Steele, M., Steele, H., Moran, G. S., & Higgitt, A. C. (1991b). The capacity
for understanding mental states: The reflective self in parent and child and its sig-nificance for security of attachment. Infant Mental Health Journal, 12, 201–218.
Fonagy, P., & Target, M. (1997). Attachment and reflective function: Their role in
self-organization. Development and Psychopathology, 9, 679–700.
Fonagy, P., Target, M., Steele, M., Steele, H., Leigh, T., Levinson, A., & Kennedy, R.
(1997). Crime and attachment: Morality, disruptive behavior, borderline person-ality disorder, crime and their relationship to security of attachment. In L.Atkinson & K. J. Zucker (Eds.), Attachment and psychopathology (pp. 223–
274). New York: Guilford Press.
Fox, N. A. (Ed.). (1994a). The development of emotion regulation: Biological and
behavioral considerations. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child
Development, 59 (2–3, Serial No. 240).
Fox, N. A. (1994b). Dynamic cerebral processes underlying emotion regulation. In N.
A. Fox (Ed.), The development of emotion regulation: Biological and behavioral
considerations. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development,59(2–3, Serial No. 240), 152–166.
Fox, N. A., Calkins, S. D., & Bell, M. A. (1994). Neural plasticity and development
in the first two years of life: Evidence from cognitive and socioemotionaldomains of research. Development and Psychopathology, 6, 677–696.
Fox, N. A., Kimmerly, N. L., & Schafer, W. D. (1991). Attachment to mother/attach -
ment to father: A meta-analysis. Child Development, 62, 210–225.
Fox, N. A., Schmidt, L. A., Calkins, S. D., Rubin, K. H., & Coplan, R. J. (1996). The
role of frontal activation in the regulation and dysregulation of social behaviorduring the preschool years. Development and Psychopathology, 8, 89–102.
Freedman, M., Black, S., Ebert, P., & Binns, M. (1998). Orbitofrontal function,
object alternation and perseveration. Cerebral Cortex, 8, 18–27.
Freeman, W. J. (1994). Role of chaotic dynamics in neural plasticity. Progress in
Brain Research, 102, 319–333.
Freud, S. (1966). Project for a scientific psychology. In J. Strachey (Ed. and Trans.),
The standard edition of the complete psychological works of Sigmund Freud(Vol. 1, pp. 281–397). London: Hogarth Press. (Original work published 1895)366 References

Freyd, J. J. (1987). Dynamic mental representations. Psychological Review, 94, 427–
438.
Freyd, J. J. (1996). Betrayal trauma: The logic of forgetting childhood abuse. Cam-
bridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Friede, E., & Weinstock, M. (1988). Prenatal stress increases anxiety related bahavior
and alters cerebral lateralization of dopamine activity. Life Sciences, 42, 1059–
1065.
Fuster, J. M. (1985). The prefrontal cortex and temporal integration. In A. Peters &
E. G. Jones (Eds.), Cerebral cortex: Vol. 4. Association and auditory cortices(pp. 151–171). New York: Plenum Press.
Fuster, J. M. (1989). The prefrontal cortex: Anatomy, physiology, and neuropsycholo -
gy of the frontal lobe (2nd ed.). New York: Raven Press.
Garber, J., & Dodge, K. A. (Eds.). (1991). The development of emotion regulation
and dysregulation. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Gazzaniga, M. S. (1988). Brain modularity: Towards a philosophy of conscious expe -
rience. In A. J. Marcel & E. Bisach (Eds.), Consciousness in contemporary sci -
ence. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Gazzaniga, M. S. (Ed.). (1995). The cognitive neurosciences. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Gazzaniga, M. S. (1996, January 11). Cognitive neuroscience and the future of psy -
chiatry. Plenary address to the American Association of Directors of Psychiatric
Residency Training, San Francisco.
Gazzaniga, M. S., Eliassen, J. C., Nisenson, L., Wessinger, C. M., & Baynes, K. B.
(1996). Collaboration between the hemispheres of a callosotomy patient:Emerging right hemisphere speech and the left brain interpreter. Brain, 119,
1255–1262.
George, C., Kaplan, N., & Main, M. (1994) An Adult Attachment Interview: Inter-
view protocol. Unpublished manuscript, University of California at Berkeley.
George, C., Kaplan, N., & Main, M. (1995) An Adult Attachment Interview: Inter-
view protocol. (2nd ed.). Unpublished manuscript, University of California at
Berkeley.
George, C., Kaplan, N., & Main, M. (1996). An Adult Attachment Interview: Inter-
view protocol (3rd ed.). Unpublished manuscript, University of California at
Berkeley.
George, C., & Solomon, J. (1996). Representational models of relationships: Links
between caregiving and attachment. Infant Mental Health Journal, 17, 198–
216.
George, M. S., Ketter, T. A., Parekh, P. I., Gill, D. S., Marangell, L., Pazzaglia, P. J.,
Herscovitch, P., & Post, R. M. (1997). Depressed subjects have decreased rCBFactivation during facial emotion recognition. International Journal of Neuropsy -
chiatric Medicine, 2, 45–55.
Gershberg, F. B., & Shimamura, A. P. (1995). The role of the frontal lobes in the use
of organizational strategies in free recall. Neuropsychologia, 13, 1305–1333.
Gilligan, C. (1996). The centrality of relationship in human development: A puzzle,
some evidence, and a theory. In G. G. Noam & K. W. Fischer (Eds.), Develop -
ment and vulnerability in close relationships (pp.237–262). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Gilligan, C. (1997). Remembering Iphigenia: Voice, resonance, and a talking cure. In
B. S. Mark & J. A. Incorvaia (Eds.), The handbook of infant, child, and adoles -
cent psychotherapy: Vol. 2. New directions in integrative treatment (pp. 169–
194). Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson.
Gleick, J. (1987). Chaos: Making a new science. New York: Viking.
Globus, G., & Arpaia, J. P. (1993). Psychiatry and the new dynamics. Biological Psy -
chiatry 35, 352–364.References 367

Goerner, S. (1995). Chaos, evolution, and deep ecology. In R. Robertson & A.
Combs (Eds.), Chaos theory in psychology and the life sciences (pp. 17–38).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Goldberg, E., & Costa, L. D. (1981). Hemispheric differences in the acquisition and
use of descriptive systems. Brain and Language, 14, 144–173.
Goldberg, S., Muir, R., & Kerr, J. (Eds.). (1995). Attachment theory: Social, develop -
mental, and clinical perspectives. Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.
Goldman-Rakic, P. S. (1993). Working memory and the mind. In Mind and brain
readings from Scientific American magazine, September (pp. 66–77). New York:
Freeman.
Goldsmith, H. H., Gottesman, I. I., & Lemery, K. S. (1997). Epidgenetic approaches
to developmental psychopathology. Development and Psychopathology, 9, 365–
288.
Goleman, D. (1995). Emotional intelligence. New York: Bantam.
Gottman, J. M., & Declaire, J. (1997). The heart of parenting: Raising an emotion -
ally intelligent child. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Gottman, J. M., Guralnick, M. J., Wilson, B., Swanson, C. C., & Murray, J. D.
(1997). What should be the focus of emotion regulation in children?: A nonlin -
ear dynamic mathematical model of children’s peer interaction in groups. Devel -
opment and Psychopathology, 9, 421–452.
Green, T., Neinemann, S. F., & Gusella, J. F. (1998). Molecular neurobiology and
genetics: Investigation of neural function and dysfunction. Neuron, 20, 427–444
Greenberg, M. T., DeKlyen, M., Speltz, M. L., & Endriga, M. C. (1997). The role of
attachment processes in externalizing psychopathology in young children. In L.Atkinson & K. J. Zucker (Eds.), Attachment and psychopathology (pp. 196–
222). New York: Guilford Press.
Greenberg, M. T., Speltz, M. L., & DeKlyen, M. (1993). The role of attachment in
the early development of disruptive behavior problems. Development and Psy-
chopathology, 5, 191–214.
Greenough, W. T., & Black, J. E. (1992). Induction of brain structure by experience:
Substrates for cognitive development. In M. R. Gunnar & C. A. Nelson (Eds.),Minnesota Symposia on Child Psychology: Vol. 24. Developmental behavioralneuroscience (pp. 155–200). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Greenspan, S. I., & Benderly, B. L. (1997). The growth of the mind and the endan -
gered origins of intelligence. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Greenwald, A. G. (1992). New Look 3: Unconscious cognition reclaimed. American
Psychologist, 47, 766–779.
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole & J. L. Moran (Eds.), Syntax
and semantics III: Speech acts (pp. 41–58). New York: Academic Press.
Gross-Tsur, V., Shalev, R. S., Manor, O., & Amir, N. (1995). Developmental right-
hemisphere syndrome: Clinical spectrum of the nonverbal learning disability.Journal of Learning Disabilities, 28, 80–86.
Gunnar, M. R. (1990). The psychobiology of infant temperament. In J. Colombo &
J. Fagen (Eds.), Individual differences in infancy: Reliability, stability, prediction
(pp. 387–409). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gunnar, M. R. (1992). Reactivity of the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenocortical sys -
tem to stressors in normal infants and children. Pediatrics, 90, 491–497.
Haden, C. A., Haine, R. A., & Fivush, R. (1997). Developing narrative structure in
parent–child reminiscing across the preschool years. Developmental Psychology,
33,295–307.
Haft, W. L., & Slade, A. (1989). Affect attunement and maternal attachment: A pilot
study. Infant Mental Health Journal, 10, 157–172.
Hagler, D. J., & Goda, Y. (1998). Synaptic adhesion: The building blocks of mem -
ory? Neuron, 20, 1059–1062.368 References

Halgren, E. (1992). Emotional neurophysiology of the amygdala within the context
of human cognition. In J. Aggleton (Ed.), The amygdala: Neurobiological
aspects of emotion, memory, and mental dysfunction (pp. 191–228). New York:
Wiley-Liss.
Halgren, E., & Marinkovic, K. (1995). Neurophysiological networks integrating
human emotions. In M. S. Gazzaniga (Ed.), The cognitive neurosciences (pp.
1137–1151). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hamann, S. B., & Squire, L. R. (1997). Intact perceptual memory in the absence of
conscious memory. Behavioral Neuroscience, 4, 850–854.
Harr‚, R. (1986). The social construction of emotions. New York: Blackwell.
Harter, S. (1988). Developmental processes in the construction of the self. In T. D.
Yawkey & J. E. Johnson (Eds.), Integrative processes and socialization: Early to
middle childhood (pp. 45–78). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Harter, S., Bresnick, S., Bouchey, H. A., & Whitsell, N. R. (1997). The development
of multiple role-related selves during adolescence. Development and Psycho -
pathology, 9, 835–854.
Haxby, J. V., Ungerleider, L. G., Horwitz, B., Maisog, J. M., Rapoport, S. L., &
Grady, C. L. (1996). Face encoding and recognition in the human brain. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA, 93, 922–927.
Hebb, D. O. (1949). The organization of behavior: A neuropsychological theory.
New York: Wiley.
Heller, W. (1993). Neuropsychological mechanisms of individual differences in emo-
tion, personality, and arousal. Neuropsychology, 7, 476–489.
Heller, W., Etienne, M. A., & Miller, G. A. (1995). Patterns of perceptual asymmetry
in depression and anxiety: Implications for neuropsychological models of emo-tion and psychopathology. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 104, 327–333.
Herman, J. L. (1992). Trauma and recovery. New York: Basic Books.
Herstgaard, L., Gunnar, M., Erickson, M. F., & Nachmias, M. (1995). Adrenocorti-
cal responses to the Strange Situation in infants with disorganized/disorientedattachment relationships. Child Development, 61, 1100–1106.
Hesse, E. (1996). Discourse, memory and the Adult Attachment Interview: A note
with emphasis on the emerging cannot classify category. Infant Mental Health
Journal, 17, 4–11.
Hesse, E. (1999). The adult attachment interview: Historical and current perspectives.
In J. Cassidy & P. R. Shaver (Eds.), Handbook of attachment: Theory, research,
and clinical applications (pp. 395–433). New York: Guilford Press.
Hesse, E., & Main, M. (1999). Unresolved/disorganized responses to trauma in non-
maltreating parents: Previously unexamined risk factor for offspring. Psychoan -
alytic Inquiry, 19, 4– .
Hesse, E., & Main, M. (in press). Disorganization in infant and adult attachment:
Descriptions, correlates and implications for developmental psychopathology.Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Association.
Hesse, E., & van IJzendoorn, M. H. (1998). Parental loss of close family members and
propensities towards absorption in offspring. Developmental Science, 1, 299–305.
Hilgard, E. R. (1977). Divided consciousness: Multiple controls in human thought
and action. New York: Wiley.
Hobson, J. (1992). The brain as a dream machine: An activation–synthesis hypothesis
of dreaming. In M. Lansky (Ed.), Essential papers on dreams (pp. 452–473).
New York: New York University Press.
Hockfield, S., & Lombroso, P. J. (1998). Development of the cerebral cortex IX: Cor -
tical development and experience—II. Journal of the American Academy of
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 37, 1103–1105.
Hofer, M. A. (1984). Relationships as regulators: A psychobiologic perspective on
bereavement. Psychosomatic Medicine, 46, 183–197.References 369

Hofer, M. (1990). Early symbiotic processes: Hard evidence from a soft place. In R.
A. Glick & S. Bone (Eds.), Pleasure beyond the pleasure principle (pp. 55–78).
New Haven: Yale University Press.
Hofer, M. A. (1994). Hidden regulators in attachment, separation, and loss. In N. A.
Fox (Ed.), The development of emotion regulation: Biological and behavioralconsiderations. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development,
59(2–3, Serial No. 240), 192–207.
Hofer, M. A. (1996). On the nature and consequences of early loss. Psychosomatic
Medicine, 58, 570–581.
Holstege, G., Bandler, R., & Saper, C. B. (1994). The emotional motor system. Prog-
ress in Brain Research, 107, 3–8.
Hornak, J., Rolls, E. T., & Wade, D. (1996). Face and voice expression identification
in patients with emotional and behavioral changes following ventral frontallobe damage. Neuropsychologia, 34, 247–261.
Horowitz, M. J. (1987). States of mind (2nd ed.). New York: Plenum Press.
Horowitz, M. J. (Ed.). (1991). Person schemas and maladaptive interpersonal pat -
terns. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Hossain, Z., Field, R., Gonzalez, T., Malphurs, J., & Del Valle, C. (1994). Infants of
“depressed” mothers interact better with their nondepressed fathers. Infant
Mental Health Journal, 15, 348–357.
Howe, M. L. (1998). Individual differences in factors that modulate storage and
retrieval of traumatic memories. Development and Psychopathology, 10, 681–
698.
Howes, C., Hamilton, C. E., & Matheson, C. C. (1994a). Children’s relationships
with peers: Differential associations with aspects of the teacher–child relation-ship. Child Development, 65, 253–263.
Howes, C., Hamilton, C. E., & Philipsen, L. C. (1998). Stability and continuity of
child–caregiver and child–peer relationships. Child Development, 69, 418–426.
Howes, C., Matheson, C. C., & Hamilton, C. E. (1994b). Maternal, teacher, and
child care history correlates of children’s relationships with peers. Child Devel-
opment, 65, 264–273.
Hubel, D. H. (1967). Effects of distortion of sensory input on the visual cortex and
the influence of the environment. Physiologist, 10, 17–45.
Hur, Y. M., & Bouchard, T. J. (1995). Genetic influences on perceptions of childhood
family environment: A reared apart twin study. Child Development, 66, 330–
345.
Incisa della Rochetta, A., & Milner, B. (1993). Strategic search and retrieval inhibi -
tion: The role of the frontal lobes. Neuropsychologia, 31, 503–524.
Ingvar, D. H. (1985). “Memory of the future”: An essay on the temporal organiza -
tion of conscious awareness. Human Neurobiology, 4, 127–136.
Izard, C. E. (1991). The psychology of emotions. New York: Plenum Press.
Izard, C. E. (1992). Basic emotions, relations among emotions, and emotion–cogni -
tion relations. Psychological Review, 99, 561–565.
Izard, C. E., & Kobak, R. R. (1991). Emotions system functioning and emotion regula -
tion. In J. Garber & K. A. Dodge (Eds.), The development of emotion regulation
and dysregulation (pp. 303–322). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Jackson, E. A. (1991). Controls of dynamic flows with attractors. Physical Review A,
44,4389–4853.
James, W. (1884). What is an emotion? Mind, 9, 188–205.
James, W. (1890). The principles of psychology. New York: Henry Holt.
Jaynes, J. (1976). The origin of consciousness in the breakdown of the bicameral
mind. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Jeffery, K. J., & Reid, I. C. (1997). Modifiable neuronal connections: An overview for
psychiatrists. American Journal of Psychiatry, 154, 156–164.370 References

Jensen, P. S., & Hoagwood, K. (1997). The book of names: DSM-IV in context.
Development and Psychopathology, 9, 231–249.
Johnson, B. H., & Hugdahl, K. (1991). Hemispheric asymmetry in conditioning to
facial emotional expressions. Psychophysiology, 28, 154–162.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1983). Mental models: Towards a cognitve science of language,
inference, and consciousness. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Jones, E., Main, M., & Del Carman, R. (Eds.). (1996). Attachment and psychopath -
ology [Special section]. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 64 (2).
Joseph, R. (1992). The right brain and the unconscious: Discovering the stranger
within. New York: Plenum Press.
Juffer, F., van IJzendoorn, M. H., & Bakermans-Kranenburg, M. J. (1997). Interven -
tion in transmission of insecure attachment: A case study. Psychological
Reports, 80, 531–543.
Kagan, J. (1992). Behavior, biology, and the meanings of temperamental constructs.
Pediatrics, 90, 510–513.
Kagan, J. (1994a). Galen’s prophecy: Temperament in human nature. New York:
Basic Books.
Kagan, J. (1994b). On the nature of emotion. In N. A. Fox (Ed.), The development of
emotion regulation: Biological and behavioral considerations. Monographs of
the Society for Research in Child Development, 59 (2–3, Serial No. 240), 7–24.
Kagan, J. (1997). Conceptualizing psychopathology: The importance of developmen -
tal profiles. Development and Psychopathology, 9, 321–334.
Kandel, E. R. (1989). Genes, nerve cells, and the remembrance of things past. Journal
of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences, 1, 103–125.
Kandel, E. R. (1998). A new intellectual framework for psychiatry. American Journal
of Psychiatry, 155, 457–469.
Kandel, E. R., & Abel, T. (1995). Neuropeptides, adenylyl cyclase, and memory stor-
age. Science, 268, 825–826.
Kandel, E. R., & Schwartz, H. (Eds.). (1992). Principles of neural science (2nd ed.).
New York: Elsevier.
Kapur, S., Craik, F. I. M., Jones, C., Brown, G. M., Houle, S., & Tulving. E. (1995).
Functional role of the prefrontal cortex in retrieval of memories: A PET study.NeuroReport, 6, 1880–1884.
Karni, A., Tanne, D., Rubenstein, B. S., Askenasi, J. J., & Sagi, D. (1992). No
dreams, no memory: The effect of REM sleep deprivation on learning a newperceptual skill. Society for Neuroscience Abstracts, 18, 387.
Karr-Morse, R., & Wiley, M. S. (1997). Ghosts from the nursery: Tracing the roots
of violence. New York: Atlantic Monthly Press.
Kelley, W. M., Miezin, F. M., McDermott, K. B., Buckner, R. L., Raichle, M. E.,
Cohen, N. J., Ollinger, J. M., Akbudak, E., Conturo, T. E., Snyder, A. Z., &Petersen, S. E. (1998). Hemispheric specialization in human dorsal frontal cor -
tex and medial temporal lobe for verbal and nonverbal memory encoding. Neu-
ron, 20, 927–936.
Kempermann, G., Kuhn, H. G., & Gage, F. H. (1997). More hippocampal neurons in
adult mice living in an enriched environment. Nature, 386, 493–495.
Kendler, K. S. (1996). Parenting: A genetic–epidemiologic perspective. American Jour -
nal of Psychiatry, 153, 11–20.
Kendler, K. S., & Eaves, L. S. (1986). Models for the joint effect of genotype and
environment on liability to psychiatric illness. American Journal of Psychiatry,
143, 279–289.
Kihlstrom, J. F. (1987). The cognitive unconscious. Science, 237, 1445–1452.
Kinsbourne, M. (1972). Eye and head turning indicates cerebral lateralization. Sci-
ence, 176, 539–541.
Koopman, C., Classen, C., & Spiegel, D. (1994). Predictors of posttraumatic stressReferences 371

symptoms among survivors of the Oakland/Berkeley, California firestorm.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 151, 888–894.
Korfmacher, J., Adam, E., Ogawa, J., & Egland, B. (1997). Adult attachment: Impli -
cations for the therapeutic process in a home intervention. Applied Develop -
mental Science, 1, 43–52.
Kosslyn, S. M. (1994). Image and brain The resolution of the imagery debate. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kraemer, G. W. (1992). A psychobiological theory of attachment. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 15, 493–541.
Krystal, J. H., Karper, L. P., Seibyl, J. P., Freeman, G. K., Delaney, R., Bremner, J. D.,
Haninger, G. R., Bowers, M. B., & Charney, D. S. (1994). Subanaestheticeffects of the noncompetitive NMDA antagonist ketamine in humans: Psycho -
tomimetic, perceptual, cognitive and neuroendocrine responses. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 51, 199–213.
Larsen, R. J., Kasimatis, M., & Frey, K. (1992). Facilitating the furrowed brow: An
unobtrusive test of the facial feedback hypothesis applied to unpleasant affect.Cognition and Emotion, 6, 321–338.
LeDoux, J. E. (1990). Information flow from sensation to emotion: Plasticity of the
neural computation of stimulus value. In M. Gabriel & J. Moore (Eds.),Learning and computational neuroscience: Foundations of adaptive networks(pp. 3–51). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
LeDoux, J. E. (1996). The emotional brain: The mysterious underpinning of emo-
tional life. New York: Simon & Schuster.
LeDoux, J. E., Romanski, L., & Xagoraris, A. (1991). Indelibility of subcortical emo-
tional memories. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 1, 238–243.
Leichtman, M. D., Ceci, S., & Ornstein, P. A. (1992). The influence of affect on
memory: Mechanism and development. In S. A. Christianson (Ed.), Handbook
of emotion and memory (pp. 181–199). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Levy, J. (1969). Possible basis for the evolution of the human brain. Nature, 224,
614–615.
Lewis, D. O., & Putnam, F. W. (1996). Dissociative identity disorder/multiple person-
ality disorder. Child and Adolescent Clinics of North America, 5 (2), 263–541.
Lewis, M. (1992). Individual differences in response to stress. Pediatrics, 90, 487–
490.
Lewis, M., & Haviland, J. M. (Eds.). (1993). Handbook of emotions. New York:
Guilford Press.
Lewis, M. D. (1995). Cognition–emotion feedback and the self-organization of devel -
opmental paths. Human Development, 38, 71–102.
Lewis, M. D. (1996). Self-organising cognitive appraisals. Cognition and Emotion,
10,1–25.
Lewis, M. D. (1997). Personality self-organization: Cascading constraints on cogni -
tion–emotion interaction. In A. Fogel, M. C. D. P. Lyra, & J. Valsiner (Eds.),
Dynamics and indeterminism in developmental and social processes (pp. 193–
216). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lichtenstein Phelps, J., Belsky, J., & Crnic, K. (1998). Earned security, daily stress,
and parenting: A comparison of five alternative models. Development and Psy -
chopathology, 10, 21–38.
Lieberman, A. F. (1991). Attachment theory and infant–parent psychotherapy: Some
conceptual, clinical and research considerations. In D. Cicchetti & S. L. Toth(Eds.), Rochester Symposium on Developmental Psychopathology: Vol. 3.
Modes and integrations (pp. 261–287). Rochester, NY: University of Rochester
Press.
Lieberman, A. F. (1993). The emotional life of the toddler. New York: Free Press.
Lieberman, A. F. (1997). Toddlers’ internalization of maternal attributions as a factor372 References

in quality of attachment. In L. Atkinson & K. J. Zucker (Eds.), Attachment and
psychopathology (pp. 277–291). New York: Guilford Press.
Llinas, R. R. (1990). Intrinsic electrical properties of mammalian neurons and CNS
function. Fidia Research Foundation Neuroscience Award Lectures, 4, 175–194.
Liotti, G. (1992). Disorganized/disoriented attachment in etiology of dissociative dis -
orders. Dissociation, 5, 196–204.
Liotti, M., & Tucker, D. M. (1992). Right hemisphere sensitivity to arousal and
depression. Brain and cognition, 18, 138–151.
Liu, D., Dioria, J., Tannenbaum, B., Caldji, C., Francis, D., Freedman, A., Sharma,
S., Pearson, D., Plotsky, P. M., & Meaney, M. J. (1997). Maternal care, hippo -
campal glucocorticoid receptors, and hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal responses
to stress. Science, 277, 1659–1662.
Loevinger, J. (1976). Ego development. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Lombroso, P. J., & Sapolsky, R. (1998). Development of the cerebral cortex XII:
Stress and brain development—I. Journal of the American Academy of Child
and Adolescent Psychiatry, 37, 1337–1339.
Lynch, M., & Cicchetti, D. (1998a). Trauma, mental representation, and the organi -
zation of memory for mother-referent material. Development and Psychopathol -
ogy, 10, 739–760.
Lynch, M., & Cicchetti, D. (1998b). An ecological-transactional analysis of children
and contexts: The longitudinal interplay among maltreatment, community vio-lence, and children’s symptomatology. Development and P sychopath ology, 10,
235–257.
Lyons-Ruth, K. (1995). Broadening our conceptual frameworks: Can we re-introduce
relational strategies and implicit representational systems to the study of psy-chopathology? Developmental Psychology, 31, 432–436.
Lyons-Ruth, K., Alpern, L., & Repacholi, B. (1993). Disorganized infant attachment
classification and maternal psychosocial problems as predictors of hostile–aggressive behavior in the preschool classroom. Child Development, 64, 572–
585.
Lyons-Ruth, K., Connell, D. B., & Grunebaum, H. U. (1990). Infants at social risk:
Maternal depression and family support services as mediators of infant develop-ment and security of attachment. Child Development, 61, 85–98.
Lyons-Ruth, K., & Jacobwitz, D. (1999). Attachment disorganization: Unresolved
loss, relational violence, and lapses in behavioral and attentional strategies. In J.Cassidy & P. R. Shaver (Eds.), Handbook of attachment: Theory, research, and
clinical applications (pp. 520–554). New York: Guilford Press.
Lyons-Ruth, K., Repacholi, B., McLeod, S., & Silva, E. (1991). Disorganized attach -
ment behavior in infancy: Short-term stability, maternal and infant correlates,
and risk-related subtypes. Development and Psychopathology, 3, 397–412.
Lyra, M. C. D. P., & Winegar, L. T. (1997). Processual dynamics of interaction
through time: Adult–child interactions and process of development. In A. Fogel,M. C. D. P. Lyra, & J. Valsiner (Eds.), Dynamics and indeterminism in develop -
mental and social processes (pp. 93–109). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
MacMillan, H. L., MacMillan, J. H., Offord, D. R., Griffith, L., & MacMillan, A.
(1994). Primary prevention of child physical abuse and neglect: A criticalreview. Parts I and II. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 35, 835–856,
857–876.
Main, M. (1991). Metacognitive knowledge, metacognitive monitoring, and singular
(coherent) versus multiple (incoherent) models of attachment: Findings anddirections for future research. In C. M. Parkes, J. Stenson-Hinde, & P. Marris(Eds.), Attachment across the life cycle (pp. 127–159). London: Routledge.
Main, M. (1993). Discourse, prediction, and recent studies in attachment: Implica -
tions for psychoanalysis. Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Association,
41,209–244.References 373

Main, M. (1995). Attachment: Overview, with implications for clinical work. In S.
Goldberg, R. Muir, & J. Kerr (Eds.), Attachment theory: Social, developmental,
and clinical perspectives (pp. 407–474). Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.
Main, M. (1996). Introduction to the special section on attachment and psychopath -
ology: 2. Overview of the field of attachment. Journal of Consulting and Clini -
cal Psychology, 64, 237–243.
Main, M. (in press). The Adult Attachment Interview: Fear, attention, safety and dis -
course processes. Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Association.
Main, M., & Goldwyn, R. (1984). Adult attachment scoring and classification sys -
tem. Unpublished manuscript, University of California at Berkeley.
Main, M., & Goldwyn, R. (1998). Adult attachment scoring and classification systems
(Version 6.3). Unpublished manuscript, University of California at Berkeley.
Main, M., & Hesse, E. (1990). Parents’ unresolved traumatic experiences are related
to infant disorganized status: Is frightened and/or frightening parental behaviorthe linking mechanism? In M. T. Greenberg, D. Cicchetti, & E. M. Cummings(Eds.), Attachment in the preschool years: Theory, research, and intervention
(pp. 161–182). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Main, M., Kaplan, N., & Cassidy, J. (1985). Security in infancy, childhood, and
adulthood: A move to the level of representation. In I. Bretherton & E. Waters(Eds.), Growing points of attachment theory and research. Monographs of the
Society for Research in Child Development, 50 (2–3, Serial No. 209), 66–104.
Main, M., & Morgan, H. (1996). Disorganization and disorientation in infant
Strange Situation behavior: Phenotypic resemblance to dissociative states. In L.K. Michelson & W. J. Ray (Eds.), Handbook of dissociation: Theoretical,
empirical, and clinical perspectives (pp. 107–138). New York: Plenum Press.
Main, M., & Solomon, J. (1986). Discovery of an insecure–disorganized/disoriented
attachment pattern. In T. B. Brazelton & M. Yogman (Eds.), Affective develop-
ment in infancy (pp. 95–124). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Main, M., & Solomon, J. (1990). Procedures for identifying infants as disorganized/
disoriented during the Ainsworth Strange Situation. In M. T. Greenberg, D.Cicchetti, & E. M. Cummings (Eds.), Attachment in the preschool years: The-
ory, research, and intervention (pp. 121–160). Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Malatesta-Magai, C. (1991). Development of emotion expression during infancy:
General course and patterns of individual difference. In J. Garber & K. A.Dodge (Eds.), The development of emotion regulation and dysregulation (pp.
49–68). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Manassis, K., Bradley, S. Goldberg, S., Hood, J., & Swinson, R. P. (1994). Attach -
ment in mothers with anxiety disorders and their children. Journal of the Amer -
ican Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 33, 1106–1113.
Marcel, A., & Bisiach, E. (Eds.). (1988). Consciousness in contemporary science.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
March, J. S., & Mulle, K. (1998). OCD in children and adolescents: A cognitive-
behavioral treatment manual. New York: Guilford Press.
Martin, K. C., & Kandel, E. R. (1996). Cell adhesion molecules, CREB, and the for -
mation of new synaptic connections [Comment]. Neuron. 4, 567–570.
McCabe, A., & Peterson, C. (1991). Getting the story: A longitudinal study of paren -
tal styles in eliciting narratives and developing narrative skill. In A. McCabe &
C. Peterson (Eds.), Developing narrative structure (pp. 217–253). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
McClelland, J. L., McNaughton, B. L., & O’Reilly, R. C. (1995). Why there are com -
plementary learning systems in the hippocampus and neocortex: Insights from
the successes and failures of connectionist models of learning and memory. Psy-
chological Review, 102, 419–457.374 References

McClelland, J. L., & Rumelhart, D. E. (Eds.). (1986). Parallel distributed processing:
Explorations in the microstructure of cognition (Vols. 1 and 2). Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
McCraty, R., Atkinson, M., Tomasion, D., & Tiller, W. A. (1998). The electricity of
touch: Detection and measurement of cardiac energy exchange between people.In K. H. Pribram & J. King (Eds.), Brain and values: Is a biological science of
values possible? (pp. 359–379). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
McEwen, B. (1999). Development of the cerebral cortex XIII: Stress and brain devel -
opment—II. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychi -
atry, 38, 101–103.
McGaugh, J. L. (1992). Affect, neuromodulatory systems, and memory storage. In S.
A. Christianson (Ed.), Handbook of emotion and memory (pp. 245–268).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
McNally, R. J., Litz, B. T., Prassas, A., Shin, L. M., & Weathers, F. W. (1994). Emo -
tional priming of autobiographical memory in post-traumatic stress disorder.
Cognition and Emotion. 8, 351–367.
Meltzoff, A. N. (1995). What infant memory tells us about infantile amnesia: Long-
term recall and deferred imitation. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology,
59,497–515.
Merzenich, M. M., Grajski, K. A., Jenkins, W. M., Recanzone, G. H., & Peterson, B.
(1991). Functional cortical plasticity: Cortical network origins of representa -
tions changes. Cold Spring Harbor Symposium on Quantitative Biology, 55,
873–887.
Merzenich, M. M., & Sameshima, K. (1993). Cortical plasticity and memory. Cur-
rent Opinion in Neurobiology, 3, 187–196.
Mesulam, M. M. (1998). Review article: From sensation to cognition. Brain, 121,
1013–1052.
Metcalfe, J., & Shimamura, A. P. (1989). Metacognition: Knowing about knowing.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Mikulincer, M. (1995). Attachment style and the mental representation of self. Jour-
nal of Personality and Social Psychology, 69, 1203–1215.
Mikulincer, M., & Orbach, I. (1995). Attachment styles and repressive defensiveness:
The accessibility and architecture of affective memories. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 68, 917–925.
Miller, P. J., Potts, R., Fung, H., Hoogstra, L., & Mintz, J. (1990). Narrative prac -
tices and the social construction of self in childhood. American Ethnologist, 17,
292–311.
Milner, B., Petrides, M., & Smith, M. L. (1985). Frontal lobes and the temporal orga -
nization of memory. Human Neurobiology, 4, 137–142.
Milner, B., Squire L. R., & Kandel, E. R. (1998). Cognitive neuroscience and the
study of memory. Neuron, 20, 445–468.
Minde, K., & Hesse, E. (1996). The role of the Adult Attachment Interview in par -
ent–infant psychotherapy: A case presentation. Infant Mental Health Journal,
17,115–126.
Morris, R. G. M. (Ed.). (1989). Parallel distributed processing: Implications for psy -
chology and neurobiology. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Morton, J., & Frith, U. (1995). Causal modeling: A structural approach to develop -
mental psychology. In D. Cicchetti & D. J. Cohen (Eds.), Developmental psy -
chopathology: Vol. 1. Theory and methods (pp. 357–390). New York: Wiley.
Moscovitch, M. (1995). Recovered consciousness: A hypothesis concerning modular -
ity and episodic memory. Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsycholo -
gy, 17, 276–290.
Moss, B., & Gotts, E. A. (1998). Relationship-based early childhood intervention: A
progress report from the trenches. Zero to Three, 18, 24–32.References 375

Myers, N. A., Clifton, R. K., & Clarkson, M. G. (1987). When they were very
young: Almost-threes remember two years ago. Infant Behavior and Develop -
ment, 10, 123–132.
Nachmias, M., Gunnar, M. R., Mangelsdorf, S., Parritz, R. H., & Buss, K. (1996).
Behavioral inhibition and stress reactivity: Moderating role of attachment secu -
rity.Child Development, 67, 508–522.
Nass, R., & Koch, D. (1991). Innate specialization for emotion: Temperament differ -
ences in children with left versus right brain damage. In N. Amir, I. Rapin, &
D. Branski (Eds.), Pediatric neurology: Vol. 1. Behavior and cognition of the
child with brain dysfunction (pp. 1–17). Basel: Karger.
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD) Early Child
Care Research Network. (1996). Characteristics of infant child care: Factorscontributing to positive caregiving. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 11,
269–306.
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD) Early Child
Care Research Network. (1997). The effects of infant child care on infant–mother attachment security: Results of the NICHD study of early child care.Child Development, 68, 860–879.
Neisser, U., & Fivush, R. (Eds.). (1994). The remembering self: Construction and
accuracy in the self-narrative. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Nelson, C. A. (Ed.). (1993). Minnesota Symposia on Child Psychology: Vol. 26.
Memory and affect in development. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Nelson, C. A. (1994). Neural bases of infant temperament. In J. E. Bates & T. D.
Wachs (Eds.), Temperament: Individual differences at the interface of biology
and behavior (pp. 47–82). Washington, DC: American Psychological Associa-
tion.
Nelson, C. A., & Bloom, F. E. (1997). Child development and neuroscience. Child
Development, 68, 970–987.
Nelson, C. A., & Carver, L. J. (1998). The effects of stress and trauma on brain and
memory: A view from developmental cognitive neuroscience. Development and
Psychopathology, 10, 793–810.
Nelson, K. (Ed.). (1989). Narratives from the crib. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univer-
sity Press.
Nelson, K. (1993a). Events, narratives, memory: What develops? In C. A. Nelson
(Ed.), Minnesota Symposia on Child Psychology: Vol. 26. Memory and affect in
development (pp. 1–24). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Nelson, K. (1993b). The psychological and social origins of autobiographical mem -
ory.Psychological Science 2, 1–8.
Neville, H. J. (1998, November 9). Specificity and plasticity in human brain develop -
ment. Special lecture of the 28th annual meeting of the Society for Neurosci -
ence, Los Angeles, California.
Neville, H. J., & Bavellier, D. (1998). Neural organization and plasticity of language.
Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 8 (2), 254–258.
Newcombe, N., & Fox, N. A. (1994). Infantile amnesia: Through a glass darkly.
Child Development, 65, 31–40.
Nieuwenhuys, R. (1994). The greater limbic system, the emotional motor system and
the brain. Progress in Brain Research, 107, 551–582.
Noam, G. G., & Fischer, K. W. (Eds.). (1996). Development and vulnerability in
close relationships. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Nobre, A. C., Coull, J. T., Frith, C. D., & Mesulam, M. M. (1999). Orbitofrontal
cortex is activated during breaches of expectation in tasks of visual attention.Nature Neuroscience, 2, 11–12.
Oatley, K., & Duncan, E. (1994). The experience of emotions in everyday life. Cogni -
tion and Emotion, 8, 369–381.376 References

Ochs, E., & Capps, L. (1996). Narrating the self. Annual Review of Anthropology,
25, 19–43.
O’Donohue, J. (1997). Anam cara: A book of celtic wisdom. New York: Har -
perCollins.
Ogawa, J. R., Sroufe, L. A., Weinfeld, N. S., Carlson, E. A., & Egeland, B. (1997).
Development and the fragmented self: Longitudinal study of dissociative symp -
tomatology in a nonclinical sample. Development and Psychopathology, 9,
855–880.
Olds, D., Henderson, C. R., Jr., Cole, R., Eckenrode, J., Kitzman, H., Luckey, D.,
Pettitt, L., Sidora, K., Morris, P., & Powers, J. (1998). Long-term effects ofnurse home visitation on children’s criminal and antisocial behavior: 15-yearfollow-up of a randomized controlled trial. Journal of the American Medical
Association, 280, 1238–1244.
Oppenheim, D., Nir, A., Warren, S., & Emde, R. N. (1997). Emotion regulation in
mother–child narrative co-construction: Associations with children’s narrativesand adaptation. Developmental Psychology, 33, 284–294.
Oppenheim, D., & Waters, H. (1995). Narrative processes and attachment represen -
tations: Issues of development and assessment. In E. Waters, B. E. Vaughn, G.
Posada, & K. Kondo-Ikemura (Eds.), Caregiving, cultural, and cognitive per -
spectives on secure-base behavior and working models: New growing points of
attachment theory and research. Monographs of the Society for Research in
Child Development, 60 (2–3, Serial No. 244), 197–215.
Ornstein, R. (1997). The right mind: Making sense of the hemispheres. New York:
Harcourt Brace.
Ornstein, R., Herron, J., Johnstone, J., & Swencionis, C. (1979). Differential right
hemisphere involvement in two reading tasks. Psychophysiology 16, 398–401.
Ortony, A., & Turner, T. (1990). What’s basic about basic emotions? Psychological
Review, 97, 315–331.
Otto, M. W., Yeo, R. A., & Dougher, M. J. (1987). Right hemisphere involvement in
depression: Toward a neuropsychological theory of negative affective experi-ence. Biological Psychiatry, 22, 1201–1215.
Oznoff, S., & Miller, J. N. (1996). An exploration of right-hemisphere contributions
to the pragmatic impairments of autism. Brain and Language, 52, 411–434.
Palaez-Nogueras, M., Field, T., Cigales, M., Gonzalez, A., & Clasky, S. (1994).
Infants of depressed mothers show less “depressed” behavior with a familiarcaregiver. Infant Mental Health Journal, 15, 358–367.
Panksepp, J. (1982). Toward a general psychobiological theory of emotions. Behav -
ioral and Brain Sciences, 5, 407–467.
Parkes, C. M., Stevenson-Hinde, J., & Marris, P. (Eds.). (1991). Attachment across
the life cycle. London: Routledge.
Pearson, J. L., Cohn, D. A., Cowan, P. A., & Cowan, C. P. (1994). Earned and con -
tinuous security in adult attachment: Relation to depressive symptomatology
and parenting style. Development and Psychopathology, 6, 259–373.
Pederson, D. R., Gleason, E., Moran, G., & Bento, S. (1998). Maternal attachment
representations, maternal sensitivity and the infant-mother relationship. Devel -
opmental Psychology, 34, 925–933.
Pennebaker, J. W., Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K., & Glaser, R. (1988). Disclosure of traumas
and immune function: Health implications for psychotherapy. Journal of Con -
sulting and Clinical Psychology, 56, 239–245.
Perner, J. (1991). Understanding the representational mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Perner, J., & Ruffman, T. (1995). Episodic memory and autonoetic consciousness:
Developmental evidence and a theory of childhood amnesia. Journal of Experi -
mental Child Psychology, 59, 516–548.References 377

Perry, B. D. (1997). Incubated in terror: Neurodevelopmental factors in the “cycle of
violence.” In J. Osofsky (Ed.), Children in a violent society (pp. 124–149). New
York: Guilford Press.
Perry, B. D., Pollard, R. A., Blakely, T. L. Baker, W. L., & Vigilante, D. (1995). Child -
hood trauma, the neurobiology of adaptation, and “use-dependent” develop -
ment of the brain: How states become traits. Infant Mental Health Journal, 16,
271–291.
Peterson, B. S. (1998, October). Functional neuroimaging of impulse control circuits.
Symposium on the Interface of Psychodynamics, Cognitive Science and Neuro -
biology at the 45th annual meeting of the American Academy of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, Anaheim, CA.
Pianta, R. C., Egeland, B., & Adam, E. K. (1996). Adult attachment classification
and self-reported psychiatric symptomatology as assessed by the MinnesotaMultiphasic Personality Inventory—2. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psy -
chology, 64, 273–281.
Pike, A., & Plomin, R. (1996). Importance of nonshared environmental factors for
childhood and adolescent psychopathology. Journal of the American Academy
of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 35, 560–570.
Pinker, S. (1997). How the mind works. New York: W. W. Norton.
Plomin, R. (1990). Nature and nurture: An introduction to human behavioral genet -
ics.Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole.
Plomin, R., & Daniels, D. (1987). Why are children in the same family so different
from each other? Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 10, 1–16.
Plomin, R., Owen, M. J., & McGuffin, P. (1994a). The genetic basis of complex
human behaviors. Science, 264, 1733–1739.
Plomin, R., Reiss, D., Hetherington, E. M., & Howe, G. W. (1994b). Nature and
nurture: Genetic contributions to measures of the family environment. Develop-
mental Psychology, 30, 32–43.
Plomin, R., Rende, R., & Rutter, M. (1991). Quantitative genetics and developmental
psychopathology. In D. Cicchetti & S. L. Toth (Eds.), Rochester symposium on
Developmental Psychopathology: Vol. 2. Internalizing and externalizing expres-sions of dysfunction (pp. 155–202). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Pons, T. (1996). Novel sensations in the congenitally blind. Nature, 380, 479–480.
Porges, S. W., Doussard-Roosevelt, J. A., & Maiti, A. K. (1994). Vagal tone and the
physiological regulation of emotion. In N. A. Fox. (Ed.), The development ofemotion regulation: Biological and behavioral considerations. Monographs of
the Society for Research in Child Development, 59 (2–3, Serial No. 240), 167–
188.
Posner, M. I. (1990). Foundations of cognitive science. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Posner, M. I., DiGirolamo, G. J., & Fernandez-Duque, D. (1997). Brain mechanisms
of cognitive skills. Consciousness and Cognition, 6 , 267–290.
Posner, M. I., & Rothbart, M. K. (1998). Attention, self-regulation and conscious -
ness. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London: Series B. Bio -
logical Sciences, 353 (1377), 1915–1927.
Post, R. M., & Weiss, S. R. B. (1997). Emergent properties of neural systems: How
focal molecular neurobiological alterations can affect behavior. Development
and Psychopathology, 9, 907–930.
Post, R. M., Weiss, S. R. B., Li, H., Smith, M. A., Zhang, L. X., Xing, G., Osuch, E.
A., & McCann, U. D. (1998). Neural plasticity and emotional memory. Devel -
opment and Psychopathology, 10, 829–856.
Price, J. L., Carmichael, S. T., & Drevets, W. C. (1994). Networks related to the
orbital and medial prefrontal cortex: A substrate for emotional behavior? Prog-
ress in Brain Research, 107, 523–536.
Prigogine, I., & Stengers, I. (1984). Order out of chaos. New York: Bantam.378 References

Putnam, F. W. (1989). Diagnosis and treatment of multiple personality disorder. New
York: Guilford Press.
Putnam, F. W. (1997). Dissociation in children and adolescents: A developmental per -
spective. New York: Guilford Press.
Radojevic, M. (1994). Mental representations of attachment among prospective Aus -
tralian fathers. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 28, 505–
511.
Rakic, P., Bourgeois, J. P., & Goldman-Rakic, P. S. (1994). Synaptic development of
the cerebral cortex: Implications for learning memory and mental illness. Prog-
ress in Brain Research, 102, 227–243.
Ramey, C. T., Yeates, K. O., & Short, E. J. (1984). The plasticity of intellectual devel -
opment: Insights from preventative intervention. Child Development, 55, 1913–
1925.
Rauch, S. L., van der Kolk, B. A., Fisler, R. E., Alpert, N. M., Orr, S. P., Savage, C.
R., Fischman, A. J., Jenike, M. A., & Pitman, R. K. (1996). A symptom provo -
cation study of posttraumatic stress disorder using positron emission tomogra -
phy and script-driven imagery. Archives of General Psychiatry, 53, 380–387.
Reed, E. S. (1994). Perception is to self as memory is to selves. In U. Neisser & R.
Fivush (Eds.), The remembering self: Construction and accuracy in the self-nar -
rative (pp. 278–292). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Reese, E., & Fivush, R. (1993). Parental styles of talking about the past. Develop -
mental Psychology, 29, 596–606.
Robertson, R., & Combs, A. (Eds.). (1995). Chaos theory in psychology and the life
sciences. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Rolls, E. T. (1995). A theory of emotion and consciousness, and its application to
understanding the neural basis of emotion. In M. S. Gazzaniga (Ed.), The cogni-
tive neurosciences (pp. 1091–1106). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Rolls, E. T. (1996). The orbitofrontal cortex. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society of London: Series B. Biological Sciences, 351, 1433–1444.
Rolls, E. T., & Treves, A. (1994). Neural networks in the brain involved in memory
and recall. Progress in Brain Research, 102, 335–341.
Rosenblum, L. A., Coplan, J. D., Friedman, S., Basoff, T., Gorman, J. M., &
Andrews, M. W. (1994). Adverse early experiences affect noradrenergic and se -
rotonergic functioning in adult primates. Biological Psychiatry, 35, 221–227.
Rosenstein, D., & Horowitz, H. A. (1996). Adolescent attachment and psychopathol -
ogy. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 64, 244–253.
Ross, E. D. (1984). Right hemisphere’s role in language, affective behavior and emo -
tion. Trends in Neuroscience, 7, 342–346.
Ross, E. D. (1996). Hemispheric specialization for emotions, affective aspects of lan -
guage and communication and the cognitive display behaviors in humans. Prog-
ress in Brain Research, 107, 583–594.
Ross, E. D., Homan, R. W., & Buck, R. (1994). Differential hemispheric lateral -
ization of primary and social emotions: Implications for developing a compre -
hensive neurology of emotions, repression, and the subconscious. Neuro -
psychiatry, Neuropsychology, and Behavioral Neurology, 7, 1–19.
Rotenberg, V. S. (1994). An integrative psychophysiological approach to brain hemi -
sphere functions in schizophrenia. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 18,
487–495.
Rothbart, M. K., & Ahadi, S. A. (1994). Temperament and the development of per -
sonality. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 103, 55–66.
Routh, C. P., Hill, J. W., Steele, H., Elliott, C. E., & Dewey, E. W. (1995). Maternal
attachment status, psychosocial stressors and problem behavior: Follow-up afterparent training courses for conduct disorder. Journal of Child Psychology and
Psychiatry, 36, 1179–1198.References 379

Rovee-Collier, C. (1993). The capacity for long-term memory in infancy. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 2, 130–135.
Rubin, D. C. (1986). Autobiographical memory. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univer -
sity Press.
Rubinow, D. R., & Post, R. M. (1992). Impaired recognition of affect in facial
expression in depressed patients. Biological Psychiatry, 31, 947–953.
Rutter, M. (1987). Psychosocial resilience and protective mechanisms. American Jour -
nal of Orthopsychiatry, 57, 316–331.
Rutter, M. (1989). Temperament: Conceptual issues and implications. In G. A.
Kohstamm, J. E. Bates, & M. K. Rothbart (Eds.), Temperament in childhood
(pp. 362–479). New York: Wiley.
Rutter, M. (1991). Age changes in depressive disorders: Some developmental consid -
erations. In J. Garber & K. A. Dodge (Eds.), The development of emotion regu -
lation and dysregulation (pp. 273–302). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Rutter, M. (1997). Clinical implications of attachment concepts: Retrospect and pros -
pect. In L. Atkinson & K. J. Zucker (Eds.), Attachment and psychopathology
(pp. 17–46). New York: Guilford Press.
Rutter, M., Dunn, J., Plomin, R., Simonoff, E., Pickles, A., Maughan, B., Ormel,
J., Meyer, J., & Eaves, L. (1997). Integrating nature and nurture: Implications
of person–environment correlations and interactions in developmental psycho -
pathology. Development and Psychopathology, 9, 335–364.
Sagi, A., van IJzendoorn, M. H., Scharf, M., Joels, T., Koren-Karie, N., Mayseless,
O., & Aviezer, O. (1997). Ecological constraints for intergenerational transmis-sion of attachment. International Journal of Behavioral Development, 20, 287–
299.
Sagi, A., van IJzendoorn, M. H. Scharf, M. H., Koren-Karie, N., Joels, T., &
Mayseless, O. (1994). Stability and discirminant validity of the Adult Attach-ment Interview: A psychometric study in young Israeli adults. Developmental
Psychology, 30, 771–777.
Sapolsky, R. M. (1997). The importance of a well-groomed child. Science, 277,
1620–1621.
Schacter D. L. (1992). Understanding implicit memory: A cognitive neuroscience
approach. American Psychologist, 47, 559–569.
Schacter, D. L. (1996). Searching for memory: The brain, the mind, and the past.
New York: Basic Books.
Schacter, D. L., Alpert, N. M., Savage, C. R., Rauch, S. L., & Albert, M. S. (1996).
Conscious recollection and the human hippocampal formation: Evidence frompositron emission tomography. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci -
ences USA, 93, 321–325.
Schacter, D. L., & Buckner, R. L. (1998). Priming and the brain. Neuron, 20, 185–
195.
Schiff, B. B., Esses, V. M., & Lamon, M. (1992). Unilateral facial contractions pro -
duce mood effect on social cognitive judgements. Cognition and Emotion 6,
357–368.
Schiffer, F., Teicher, M. H., & Papanicolaou, A. C. (1995). Evoked potential evidence
for right brain activity during recall of traumatic memories. Journal of
Neuropsychiatry, 7, 187–250.
Schore, A. N. (1994). Affect regulation and the origin of the self: The neurobiology
of emotional development. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Schore, A. N. (1996). The experience-dependent maturation of a regulatory system in
the orbital prefrontal cortex and the origin of developmental psychopathology.Development and Psychopathology, 8, 59–87.
Schore, A. N. (1997). Early organization of the nonlinear right brain and develop -380 References

ment of a predisposition to psychiatric disorders. Development and Psychopath -
ology 9, 595–631.
Schore, A. N. (1998). The experience-dependent maturation of an evaluative system
in the cortex. In K. H. Pribram & J. King (Eds.), Brain and values: Is a biologi -
cal science of values possible? (pp. 337–358). Mahway, NJ: Erlbaum.
Schuengel, C., Bakermans-Kranenburg, M. J., & van IJzendoorn, M. H. (in press).
Attachment and loss: Frightening maternal behavior linking unresolved loss anddisorganized infant attachment. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology.
Schuengel, C., van IJzendoorn, M. H., Bakermans-Kranenburg, M. J., & Blom, M.
(1997). Frightening, frightened, and dissociated behavior, unresolved loss and
infant disorganization. Paper presented at the biennial meeting of the Society for
Research in Child Development, Washington, DC.
Schumacher, J. F. (1991). Human suggestibility: Advances in theory, research and
applications. New York: Routledge.
Schuman, J. (1997). The neurobiology of affect in language. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Schweinhart, J. L., & Weikart, D. P. (1992). High/Scope Perry Preschool Program
outcomes. In J. McCord & R. E. Tremblay (Eds.), Preventing antisocial behav -
ior: Interventions from birth through adolescence (pp. 67–86). New York:
Guilford Press.
Semrud-Clikeman, M., & Hynd, G. W. (1990). Right hemisphere dysfunction in non -
verbal learning disabilities: Social, academic, and adaptive functioning in adults
and children. Psychological Bulletin, 107, 196–209.
Sergent, J., Ohta, S., & MacDonald, B. (1992). Functional neuroanatomy of face and
object processing. Brain, 115, 15–36.
Shapiro, F. (1995). Eye movement desensitization and reprocessing: Basic principles,
protocols, and procedures. New York: Guilford Press.
Shevrin, H. (1992). Subliminal perception, memory, and consciousness: Cognitive and
dynamic perspectives. In R. F. Bornstein & T. S. Pittman (Eds.), Perception
without awareness: Cognitive, clinical, and social perspectives (pp. 123–142).
New York: Guilford Press.
Shimamura, A. P. (1995). Memory and frontal lobe function. In M. S. Gazzaniga
(Ed.), The cognitive neurosciences (pp. 803–814). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Shinbrot, T., Grebogi, C., Ott, E., & Yorke, J. A. (1993). Using small perturbations
to control chaos. Nature, 363, 411–417.
Siegel, D. J. (1995a). Memory, trauma, and psychotherapy: A cognitive science view.
Journal of Psychotherapy Practice and Research, 4, 93–122.
Siegel, D. J. (1995b). Perception and cognition. In B. Kaplan & W. Sadock (Eds.),
Comprehensive textbook of psychiatry (Vol. 6, pp. 277–291). Baltimore: Wil -
liams & Wilkins.
Siegel, D. J. (1996a). Cognition, memory, and dissociation. Child and Adolescent
Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 5, 509–536.
Siegel, D. J. (1996b). Dissociation, psychotherapy and the cognitive sciences. In J.
Spira (Ed.), The treatment of dissociative identity disorder (pp. 39–80). San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Sigman, M., & Capps, L. (1997). Children with autism: A developmental perspective .
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Sigman, M., & Siegel, D. J. (1992). The interface between the psychobiological and
cognitive models of attachment. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 15, 523.
Singer, J. A., & Salovey, P. (1993). The remembered self: Emotion and memory in
personality. New York: Free Press.
Skinner, J. E., Molnar, M., Vybiral, T., & Mitra, M. (1992). Application of chaos the -
ory to biology and medicine. Integrative Physiological and Behavioral Science,
27,43–57.
Snow, C. E. (1990). Building memories: The ontogeny of autobiography. In D.References 381

Cicchetti & M. Beeghly (Eds.), The self in transition (pp. 213–242). New York:
Academic Press.
Solomon, J., George, C., & de Jong, A. (1995). Children classified as controlling at
age six: Evidence for disorganized representational strategies and aggression athome and at school. Development and Psychopathology, 7, 447–463.
Spangler, G., & Grossmann, K. E. (1993). Biobehavioral organization in securely and
insecurely attached infants. Child Development, 64, 1439–1450.
Spangler, G., Fremmer-Bombik, E., & Grossmann, K. (1996). Social and individual
determinants of infant attachment security and disorganization. Infant Mental
Health Journal, 17, 127–139.
Spence, S., Shapiro, D., & Zaidel, E. (1996). The role of the right hemisphere in the
physiological and cognitive components of emotional processing. Psycho -
physiology, 33, 112–122.
Spiegel, D. (1996). Dissociative disorders. In R. E. Hales & S. C. Yudofsky (Eds.).
American Psychiatric Press synopsis of psychiatry (pp. 583–604). Washington,
DC: American Psychiatric Press.
Springer, S. P., & Deutsch, G. (1993). Left brain, right brain (4th ed.). New York:
Freeman.
Squire, L. R. (1987). Memory and brain. New York: Oxford University Press.
Squire, L. R. (1992). Declarative and non-declarative memory: Multiple brain sys -
tems supporting learning and memory. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 4,
232–243.
Squire, L. R., Knowlton, B., & Musen, G. (1993). The structure and organization of
memory. Annual Review of Psychology, 44, 453–495.
Squire, L. R., & Zola-Morgan, S. (1991). The medial temporal lobe memory system.
Science, 153, 2380–2386.
Sroufe, L. A. (1990). An organizational perspective on the self. In D. Cicchetti & M.
Beeghly (Eds.), The self in transition: Infancy to childhood (pp. 281–307). Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press.
Sroufe, L. A. (1996). Emotional development: The organization of emotional life in
the early years. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Sroufe, L. A. (1997). Psychopathology as an outcome of development. Development
and Psychopathology, 9, 251–268.
Sroufe, L. A., Egeland, B., & Kreutzer, T. (1990). The fate of early experience follow -
ing developmental change: Longitudinal approaches to individual adaptation in
childhood. Child Development, 61, 1363–1373.
Sroufe, L. A., & Jacobvitz, D. (1989). Diverging pathways, developmental transfor -
mations, multiple etiologies, and the problem of continuity in development.
Human Development, 32, 196–203.
Stansbury, K., & Gunnar, M. R. (1994). Adrenocortical activity and emotion regula -
tion. In N. A. Fox (Ed.), The development of emotion regulation: Biological and
behavioral considerations. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child
Development, 59 (2–3, Serial No. 240), 108–134.
Stecklis, H. D., & Kling, A. (1985). Neurobiology of affiliative behavior in nonhu -
man primates. In M. Reite & T. Field (Eds.), The psychobiology of attachment
and separation (pp. 93–134). Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
Steele, H., & Steele, M. (1994). Intergenerational patterns of attachment. In K.
Bartholomew & D. Perlman (Eds.), Advances in personal relationships: Vol. 5.
Attachment processes in adulthood (pp 93–120). London: Jessica Kingsley.
Steele, H., Steele, M., & Fonagy, P. (1996). Associations among attachment classifica -
tions in mothers, fathers and their infants: Evidence for a relationship-specific
perspective. Child Development, 67, 541–555.
Stein, N. L., & Trabasso, T. (1992). The organization of emotional experience: Cre -382 References

ating links among emotion, thinking, language, and intentional action. Cogni -
tion and Emotion, 6, 225–244.
Stern, D. N. (1985). The interpersonal world of the infant. New York: Basic
Books.
Stoller, R. J. (1985). Observing the erotic imagination. New Haven, CT: Yale Univer -
sity Press.
Taylor, J. G. (1994). Non-linear dynamics in neural networks. Progress in Brain
Research, 102, 371–382.
Teicher, M. H., Ito, Y., Glod, C. A., Andersen, S. L., Dumont, N., & Ackerman, E.
(1997). Preliminary evidence for abnormal cortical development in physicallyand sexually abused children using EEG coherence and MRI. Annals of the
New York Academy of Sciences, 821, 160–175.
Terr, L. C. (1988). What happens to early memories of trauma? Journal of the Ameri -
can Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 27, 96–104.
Terr, L. C. (1991). Childhood traumas: An outline and overview. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 148, 10–20.
Terr, L. (1993). Unchained memories. New York: Basic Books.
Thatcher, R. W. (1994). Cyclical cortical reorganization: Origins of human cognitive
development. In G. Dawson & K. W. Fischer (Eds.), Human behavior and the
developing brain (pp. 232–266). New York: Guilford Press.
Thatcher, R. W. (1997). Human frontal lobe development: A theory of cyclical corti -
cal reorganization. In N. A. Krasnegor, G. Reid-Lyon, & P. S. Goldman-Rakic
(Eds.), Development of the prefrontal cortex: Evolution, neurobiology, and
behavior (pp. 85–113). Baltimore: Brookes.
Thatcher, R. W., Walker, R. A., & Guidice, S. (1987). Human cerebral hemispheres
develop at different rates and ages. Science, 236, 1110–1113.
Thelen, E. (1989). Self-organization in developmental processes: Can systems
approaches work? In M. Gunnar & E. Thelen (Eds.), Minnesota Symposium on
Child Psychology: Vol. 22. Systems and development (pp. 77–117). Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Thomas, A., & Chess, S. (1977). Temperament and development. New York: Brun-
ner/Mazel.
Thompson, R. A. (1994). Emotion regulation: A theme in search of definition. In N.
A. Fox. (Ed.), The development of emotion regulation: Biological and behavior -
al considerations. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Develop -
ment, 59 (2–3, Serial No. 240), 25–52.
Tononi, G., & Edelman, G. M. (1998). Consciousness and complexity. Science 282,
1846–1851.
Toth, S. L., Cicchetti, D., Macfie, J., & Emde R. (1997). Representations of self and
other in the narratives of neglected, physically abused and sexually abused pre -
schoolers. Development and Psychopathology, 9, 781–796.
Trevarthen, C. (1990a). Integrative functions of the cerebral commissures. In F. Boller
& J. Grafman (Eds.), Handbook of neurospsychology (Vol. 4, pp. 49–83).
Amsterdam, Netherlands: Elsevier Sciences.
Trevarthen, C. (1990b). Growth and education of the hemispheres. In C. Trevarthen
(Ed.), Brain circuits and functions of the mind: Essays in honour of Roger W.
Sperry (pp. 334–363). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Trevarthen C. (1993). The self born in intersubjectivity: The psychology of infant
communicating. In U. Neisser (Ed.), The perceived self: Ecological and interper -
sonal sources of self-knowledge (pp. 121–173). New York: Cambridge Univer -
sity Press.
Trevarthen, C. (1996). Lateral asymmetries in infancy: Implications for the develop -
ment of the hemispheres. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 20, 571–
586.References 383

Tronick, E. Z. (1989). Emotions and emotional communication in infants. American
Psychologist, 44, 112–119.
Tucker, D. M. (1981). Lateral brain function, emotion, and conceptualization. Psy-
chological Bulletin, 89, 19–46.
Tucker, D. M. (1992). Developing emotions and cortical networks. In M. R. Gunnar
& C. Nelson (Eds.), Minnesota Symposia on Child Psychology: Vol. 24. Devel -
opmental behavioral neuroscience (pp. 75–128). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Tucker, D. M., Luu, P., & Pribram, K. H. (1995). Social and emotional self-regula -
tion. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 769, 213–239.
Tulving, E. (1993). Varieties of consciousness and levels of awareness in memory. In
A. Baddeley & L. Weiskrantz (Eds.), Attention, selection, awareness and con -
trol: A tribute to Donald Broadbent (pp. 283–299). London: Oxford University
Press.
Tulving, E., Kapur, S., Craik, F. I. M., Moscovitch, M., & Houle, S. (1994). Hemi -
spheric encoding/retrieval asymmetry in episodic memory: Positron emission
tomography findings. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA,
91,2016–2020.
Vandenberg, B. (1998). Hypnosis and human development: Interpersonal influence of
intrapersonal processes. Child Development, 69, 262–267.
van den Boom, D. C. (1994). The influence of temperatment and mothering on
attachment and exploration: An experimental manipulation of sensitive respon -
siveness among lower-class mothers with irritable infants. Child Development,
65,1449–1469.
van den Boom, D. C. (1995). Do first-year intervention effects endure? Follow-up
during toddlerhood of a sample of Dutch irritable infants. Child Development,
66,1798–1816.
van der Kolk, B. A., McFarlane, A. C., & Weisaeth, L. (Eds.). (1996). Traumatic
stress: The effects of overwhelming experience on mind, body, and society. New
York: Guilford Press.
van der Kolk, B. A., & van der Hart, O. (1989). Pierre Janet and the breakdown of
adaptation in psychological trauma. American Journal of Psychiatry, 146,
1530–1540.
van IJzendoorn, M. H. (1992). Intergenerational transmission of parenting: A review
of studies in nonclinical populations. Developmental Review, 12, 76–99.
van IJzendoorn, M. H. (1995). Adult attachment representations, parental respon -
siveness, and infant attachment: A meta-analysis on the predictive validity of the
Adult Attachment Interview. Psychological Bulletin, 117, 387–403.
van IJzendoorn, M. H., & Bakermans-Kranenburg, M. J. (1996). Attachment repre -
sentations in mothers, fathers, adolescents and clinical groups: A meta-analytic
search for normative data. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 64,
8–21.
van IJzendoorn, M. H., & Bakermans-Kranenburg, M. J. (1997). Intergenerational
transmission of attachment: A move to the contextual level. In L. Atkinson &K. J. Zucker (Eds.), Attachment and psychopathology (pp. 135–170). New
York: Guilford Press.
van Ooyen, A., & van Pelt, J. (1994). Activity-dependent neurite outgrowth and neu -
ral network development. Progress in Brain Research, 102, 245–259.
van Pelt, J., Corner, M. A., Uylings, H. B. M., & Lopes Da Silva, F. H. (Eds.). (1994).
The self-organizing brain: From growth cones to functional networks. Progress
in Brain Research, 102, 1–446.
Vaughn, B. E., Stevenson-Hinde, J., Waters, E., Kotsaftis, A., Lefever, G. B.,
Shouldice, A., Trudel, M., & Belsky, J. (1992). Attachment security and temper -
ament in infancy and childhood: Some conceptual clarifications. Developmental
Psychology, 28, 463–473.384 References

Vygotsky, L. (1986). Thought and language (Ed. A. Kozulin). Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press. (Original work published 1934)
Walden, T. A. (1991). Infant social referencing. In J. Garber & K. A. Dodge (Eds.),
The development of emotion regulation and dysregulation (pp. 69–88). Cam -
bridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Waller, N., Putnam, F. W., & Carlson, E. B. (1996). Types of dissociation and disso -
ciative types: A taxometric analysis of dissociative experiences. Psychological
Methods, 1, 300–321.
Ward, M. J., & Carlson, E. A. (1995). Associations among adult attachment repre -
sentation, maternal sensitivity, and infant–mother attachment in a sample of
adolescent mothers. Child Development 66, 69–79.
Waters, E., Crowell, J., Treboux, D., O’Connor, E., Posada, G., & Golby, B. (1996).
Discriminant validity of the Adult Attachment Interview. Child Development,
67,2584–2599.
Watt, D. F. (1998). Affect and the limbic system: Some hard problems. Journal of
Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences, 10, 113–116.
Webster’s New World Dictionary (3rd ed.). (1997). New York: Simon & Schuster/
Macmillan.
Weinberger, N. M. (1995). Retuning the brain by fear conditioning. In M. S.
Gazzaniga (Ed.), The cognitive neurosciences (pp. 1071–1089). Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Wheeler, M. A., Stuss, D. T., & Tulving, E. (1997). Toward a Theory of episodic
memory: The frontal lobes and autonoetic consciousness. Psychological Bulle-
tin, 121, 331–354.
Wheeler, R. E., Davidson, R. J., & Tomarken, A. J. (1993). Frontal brain asymmetry
and emotional reactivity: A biological substrate of affective style. Psycho-
physiology, 30, 82–89.
White, M., & Epston D. (1990). Narrative means to therapeutic ends. New York:
Norton.
Wiesel, T. N., & Hubel, D. H. (1963). Single cell responses in striate cortex of kittens
deprived of vision in one eye. Journal of Neurophysiology, 26, 1003–1007.
Williams, L. M. (1995). Recovered memories of abuse in women with documented
child sexual victimization histories. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 8, 649–674.
Winnicott, D. W. (1965). The maturational processes and the facilitating environ -
ment: Studies in the theory of emotional development. New York: International
Universities Press.
Winson, J. (1993). The biology and function of rapid eye movement sleep. Current
Opinion in Neurobiology 3, 243–248.
Wise, S. P., Murray, E. A., & Gerfen, C. R. (1996). The frontal cortex–basal gan -
glia system in primates. Critical Reviews in Neurobiology, 10, 317–356.
Wittling, W., & Roschmann, R. (1993). Emotion-related hemisphere asymmetry: Sub -
jective emotional responses to laterally presented films. Cortex, 29, 431–448.
Wittling, W., & Schweiger, E. (1993). Neuroendocrine brain asymmetry and physical
complaints. Neuropsychologia, 31, 591–608.
Wolf, D. P. (1990). Being of several minds: Voices and versions of the self in early
childhood. In D. Cicchetti & M. Beeghly (Eds.), The self in transition: Infancy
to childhood (pp. 183–212). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Yawkey, T. D., & Johnson, J. E. (Eds.). (1988). Integrative processes and socializa -
tion: Early to middle childhood. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Yehuda, R., & McFarlane, A. C. (1995). Conflict between current knowledge about
posttraumatic stress disorder and its original conceptual basis. American Jour -
nal of Psychiatry, 152, 1705–1713.
Zaidel, D. W., Hugdahl, K., & Johnsen, B. H. (1995). Physiological responses to ver -References 385

bally inaccessible pictorial information in the left and right hemispheres. Neuro -
psychology, 9, 52–57.
Zaidel, E. Clarke, J. M., & Suyenobu, B. (1990). Hemispheric independence: A para -
digm case for cognitive neuroscience. In A. B. Scheibel & A. F. Wechsler (Eds.),
Neurobiology of higher cognitive function (pp. 297–355). New York: Guilford
Press.
Zeanah, C. H. (Ed.). (1993). Handbook of infant mental health. New York: Guilford
Press.
Zeanah, C. H., Boris, N. W., & Larrieu, J. A. (1997a). Infant development and devel -
opmental risk: A review of the past 10 years. Journal of the American Academy
of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 36, 165–178.
Zeanah, C. H., Finely-Belgrad, E., & Benoit, D. (1997b). Intergenerational transmis -
sion of relationship psychopathology: A mother–infant case study. In L.
Atkinson & K. J. Zucker (Eds.), Attachment and psychopathology (pp 292–
318). New York: Guilford Press.
Zeitlin, S. B., & McNally, R. J. (1991). Implicit and explicit memory bias for threat
in post-traumatic stress disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 29, 451–457
Zola-Morgan, S., Squire, L. R., Alvarez-Royo, P., & Clower, R. P. (1991). Indepen -
dence of memory functions and emotional behavior: Separate contributions of
the hippocampal formation and the amygdala. Hippocampus, 1, 207–220.386 References

IndexIndex
/fl2rt
Index
Abuse. SeeTrauma
Activity-dependent process and brain
development, 14
Adult Attachment Interview (AAI), 77–83,
89–92, 107
Adults
attachment figures and, 68state of mind with respect to attachment,
74, 79–80, 81, 83
dismissing, 94–100, 161–162, 287–290preoccupied, 103–107secure/autonomous, 89–92unresolved/disorganized, 110–116
Affect. SeeVitality affects
Ainsworth, Mary, 72–73Alignment, 280–281Ambivalent attachment
in adulthood, 103–107complexity theory and, 293description of, 74, 76, 100–103parenting and, 283–284self-organization and, 224states of mind in, 237–238
American Sign Language and brain
asymmetry, 186–187
Amnesia, 38, 43–47Amygdala
appraisal of meaning and, 48, 49, 131face-recognition cells in, 138fight-or-flight response and, 132–133, 249function of, 10, 132intrinsic motive formation and, 174stress and, 50
Anatomy of brain
cerebral asymmetry and, 178–181“hard-wiring” of, 137–138, 149–150interconnections of, 13as open and dynamic system, 16–17See also specific structures of the brain
(i.e., Amygdala, Anterior cingulate)Anterior cingulate, 10, 131, 132, 265
Anterior commissures, 12, 178, 303Anterograde amnesia, 38Anticipation of future, 30–31, 305, 328,
330
Appraisal system
emotion and, 124–125, 264–265emotion as value system for, 6, 136–139,
158, 278
feedback mechanism of process of, 132–
133
limbic system and, 131sensitivity and modifications in, 248somato-sensory data and, 143–144specificity of, 250–253
“Approach” behavior and left hemisphere,
175
Arousal
autonomic nervous system and, 278–279emotion and, 124–125, 158, 264–265suspended cortical processing and, 258–
262
“As-if” somatic marker, 144, 146Associational linkages, 27Asymmetrical relationships, 88–89Asymmetry of brain
anticipation and, 305assertive versus acceptive states, 175attachment, mental representational
processes, and, 185–190
consciousness and, 154, 184–185dorsal versus ventral pathways, 175–176,
178
emotion and, 150–155, 181–184gender and, 190–192implications of, 196–199infants and, 173–175influence of experience on, 193–196integration and, 326–327overview of, 7, 17–18
387

Asymmetry of brain ( continued )
relevance to relationships of, 205–207representations and processing and, 161–
162
research on, 177–181See also Left hemisphere; Right hemisphere
Attachment
autonoetic consciousness and, 36brain asymmetry and, 185–190communication of emotion and, 4contingent communication and, 21, 69–71,
117
description of, 67emotion and, 142–143emotion regulation and, 245, 278–282“feeling felt” and, 89, 149, 161, 247, 272–
273
functions of, 68implicit memory and, 31–34infant classifications of, 75–77integration and, 312–314laterality-attachment hypothesis, 206–
207
predictors of, 5–6, 81, 118principles of, 67–68psychopathology and, 83–87rupture and repair in, 116–117self-organization and, 223–226self-regulation and, 285–287specificity to parent of, 81–82Strange Situation study, 72–75theories of, 71–72trauma and, 58–59virtual other in, 101–102, 104, 223–224vocal rhythm matching and, 225–226
Attractor states, 218–219, 234–235, 251–
252, 294
Attunement
versus alignment, 280–281ambivalent attachment and, 101description of, 70–71, 88elements of, 118emotion and, 153–155mental state resonance as, 70–71, 89, 149
Authorial self, 323–324Autism, 140, 200–201Autobiographical memory
childhood amnesia and, 45–46development of, 34–35lack of in dismissing adults, 94–100narrative and, 61subjective experience of, 40–41
Autobiographical narrative. SeeNarrative
Autonoetic consciousness
definition of, 35in dismissing adults, 95, 97–98mental representations and, 170–171mental time travel as, 35–36, 40, 332narrative and, 330recall and, 39, 41right hemisphere and, 176
trauma and, 53–54
Autonomic nervous system and arousal,
278–279, 281–282
Avoidant attachment
in adulthood, 94–100, 161–162, 287–290communication and, 334complexity theory and, 293description of, 74, 76, 92–94dissociative symptoms and, 96impairments of, 171–172, 242parenting and, 283psychopathology and, 84rigidity in, 237self-organization and, 224
Basal ganglia, 174, 303–304
Basic emotions
categorical type, 127–128, 158, 273comparison to social emotions, 183–184importance of, 122–123
Bilateral form of coherence, 189Bilateral integration process for narratives,
331, 334–335
Borderline personality disorder, 243Bowlby, John, 72Brain. SeeAnatomy of brain; Asymmetry of
brain; Development of brain
Brainstem, 10
Categorical emotions, 127–128, 158, 273
Cerebellum, 12“Chalkboard of the mind.” SeeWorking
memory
Childhood amnesia, 43–47Clinical examples
avoidantly attached adult, 289–290cognitive override mechanism, 248–250emotion dysregulation, 243–244, 256–258,
259, 261–262, 266–269
impulse control problem, 285–287
Co-construction of narrative, 60, 62Cognition as part of emotion, 17, 159, 173Cognitive crowding hypothesis, 192, 197Cognitive mapper function, 34–35, 41, 330Cognitive override mechanism, 248–250,
275
Cognitive process, 163Cognitive representation, 176–177Coherence, 321Coherence of mind, 90, 189, 310, 311,
315–317
Coherence-of-mind rating (AAI), 80–81Coherence of narrative, 62, 312–313Cohesion, 311, 321Cohesive states of mind, 209, 210Complexity theory
attachment and, 293communication and, 225description of, 7, 214–217388 Index

emergent and recursive patterns in, 221–
222
integration and, 308, 321nonlinear features of, 220–221self-organization and, 217–220, 238spatiotemporal integration and, 304–305specificity of appraisal and, 251–252strange attractor states and, 294
Conceptual representation, 167–168, 169–
170
Connectionist model, 216Consciousness
access to and emotion regulation, 262–270asymmetry of brain and, 184–185dimensions of, 171emotion and, 133–136mental representational processes and,
169–172
noetic type of, 39See also Autonoetic consciousness
Constraints and system balance, 222–223Context sensitivity of states of mind, 213–
214
Contingent communication
attachment and, 279–280brain development and, 21–22joint referencing signals and, 200response flexibility and, 141, 142–143states of mind and, 69–71
Corpus callosum, 12, 178, 303Cortical consolidation, 37–38, 52, 54, 332CREB-1 (cyclic AMP response element-
binding), 48–49
Delayed recall, 55
Depression
brain asymmetry and, 186“earned” secure autonomous status and,
92
hidden observers and, 325parenting and, 129, 246–247profile of activation in, 228vitality affects and, 129
Developmental issues
experience and, ix–x
integration and resilience or vulnerability,
313–314
Development of brain, 13–15Diachronic integration, 311“Dichotomania,” 177–178Differentiation of primary emotional states,
127–128, 158
Dis-association of thinking from behavior,
202
Dismissing adults, 94–100, 161–162, 287–
290
Disorganized/disoriented attachment
in adulthood, 110–116description of, 74, 76, 107–110impairments in, 242, 317–320parenting and, 284
psychopathology and, 84self-organization and, 224–225states of mind in, 237–238unresolved loss or trauma and, 111–116,
119, 294, 296–297
Display rules, 270–271Dissociation, 51, 319–320Dissociative disorders, 96, 243, 318, 325Divided-attention studies, 38–39, 51Dorsal pathway, 175–176, 178, 305Dorsal-ventral integration, 302, 311, 331Drawing on the Right Side of the Brain
(Edwards, 1989), 198
Dyadic regulation, 240Dyadic states of mind, 231–236, 257, 292–
294, 336–337
Dynamical systems. SeeComplexity theory
“Earned” secure autonomous status, 91–92,
118, 287, 313
Ecphory, 41–42Edelman’s model of reentry, 169–170, 321Elaborative appraisal and arousal, 124Emergent patterns, 221Emotion
affect and mood, 128–130asymmetry of brain and, 181–184cohesive states of mind and, 210communication of, 148–150defining, 122–124differentiation and categorical emotions,
127–128, 158
individual differences in experience of,
145–148
initial orientation, appraisal, and arousal,
124–125, 158, 264–265
memory and, 50–51, 99nonconscious versus conscious, 132–136nonverbal communication of, 121, 150as part of cognition, 17, 159, 173primary emotions, 125–127regulation processes, 155–157remembering and forgetting and, 47–49right hemisphere and, 150–152self-regulation and, 239–241, 306–307social processing and, 130–132somatic response and, 143–144states of mind and, 226–227as subjective experience, 152–155as value system for appraisal of meaning,
6, 136–139, 158, 278
See also Emotion regulation
Emotion regulation
access to consciousness and, 262–270attachment and, 278–282, 285–287components of, 155–157, 244, 245–246definition of, 245external expression and, 270–273intensity and, 246–247Index 389

Emotion regulation ( continued )
recovery processes and, 258–262sensitivity and, 247–250specificity of appraisal and, 250–253in trauma and grief, 294–298windows of tolerance and, 253–258, 281–
282
Encoding
as conceptual representation, 167–168of memories, 25, 27, 28, 36, 52, 332
Energy, mind and flow of, 3–4, 130–131,
261–262
Engram, 27–28Epigenetic factors, 20Epilepsy and plasticity of brain, 193Episodic memory. SeeAutobiographical
memory
Evocative memory, 71Evolutionary issues
anticipation of future, 305cause-effect relationships, 328complexity theory, 215–216gender and brain asymmetry, 192mindsight, 148–149problem-solving skills, 163–164reverse-engineering the mind, 31, 328specificity of appraisal system, 253
Experience
influence on brain asymmetry, 193–196interaction with genes, 18–21, 85–86making sense of, 327–329as shaper of development, ix–x,1 6
windows of tolerance and, 255–256
Experience-dependent processes, 13–14, 16,
24–25, 188
Explicit memory
communication of, 42as context dependent, 41description of, 28development of and childhood amnesia,
44–45
forgetting and, 47–49forms of, 34long-term type, 37subjective experience of, 39–43
External expression and emotion regulation,
270–273
Facial expression of emotion, 149–150,
154–155, 270–271
False memories, 326False self, 104, 155, 230–231, 271, 314Family patterns, automatic reflexes of, 233–
236
Fear-inducing actions of parents, 113–114, 317Feedback mechanism of appraisal process,
132–133
“Feeling felt,” 89, 149, 161, 247, 272–273Feelings, 128, 264–265Flow experiences, 322–323Focal attention, 38–39, 126, 134–135, 264
Forgetting and explicit memory, 47–49Forty-hertz pattern, 134–135, 184Frontal cortex-basal ganglia system of
neural integration, 303–304
Frontal lobes, 12
Gender differences
brain asymmetry and, 190–192emotional patterns and, 147–148
Genes, 18–21, 85–86, 138–139Genotype, 20Grief and loss, emotion regulation and,
296–298
Guided imagery, 288, 289
Hebb’s Axiom, 26, 64, 133, 219, 269
Hedonic tone, 126, 183Hemispheric encoding-retrieval asymmetry,
52, 331–332
Hidden observers and integration, 324–326Higher mode of processing, 254Higher-order consciousness, 170–171Higher structures of brain, 10Hippocampus
amnesia and, 38as cognitive mapper, 34–35, 41, 330function of, 11, 178long-term explicit memory and, 37myelination in, 307stress and, 50, 54, 59
Humiliation, 280, 291Hypnosis and hidden observers, 324–326Hypothalamus, 11, 174
Implicit memory
developmental implications of, 31–34in infants, 28–30subjective experience of, 39–43
Incoherence of mind, 312–313, 316–317Infancy
asymmetry of brain in, 173–175attachment classifications in, 75–77attachment in, 31–32attachment studies of, 72–75brain structure in, 14implicit memory in, 28–30See also Attachment
Information processing
attention and, 137brain anatomy and neural circuit function,
15–16
mental representations and, 3–4, 162–164modes and modules, 172–173states of mind and, 228–229subjective experience of, 164–165
Initial orienting response, 124, 158, 264–265Insecure attachment
lack of integration of hemispheres in, 189psychopathology and, 84, 86–87390 Index

state of mind and, 32
vulnerability and, 314See also Ambivalent attachment; Avoidant
attachment; Disorganized/disorientedattachment
Integration
attachment and, 312–314coherence and complexity and, 320–323definition of, 301, 321development of, 306–309hemispheric laterality and, 326–327hidden observers and, 324–326making sense and, 327–329of minds, 309–311narrative process and, 8–9, 323–324neural integration, 301–305as process, 336
Integrative function of emotion, 239–241Intellectualization, 202–203Intensity and emotion regulation, 246–247Interaction of genes and experience, 18–21,
85–86
Interhemispheric resonance, 184–185Interindividual integration, 309, 328–329,
333–335
Interlocking states of mind, 292–293Interpersonal connection, 8, 9, 21–22, 45,
276–278
Interpersonal neurobiology
as field of study, 4, 21of stories, 330–335
Interpersonal relationships, 4, 33–34, 292–294Interpreter function of left hemisphere,
180–181, 326, 327
Intersubjectivity, 101–102Intrinsic motive formation, 174–175, 176,
192, 193, 302
Joining experiences, 322–323
Joint referencing signals, 200
Kandel, Eric, viii–ix
Ketamine, 319–320
Lateral integration, 302–303, 311
Laterality-attachment hypothesis, 206–207Lateralization. SeeAsymmetry of brain
Lateral prefrontal cortex, 12, 134, 135–
136, 178
Learning, process of, 193–196, 216, 307Left hemisphere
“approach” behavior and, 175function of, 196–197, 198interpreter function of, 180–181, 326,
327
narrative and, 331specialization of, 179, 180
Limbic system
challenge to notion of, 12–13emotion and, 122function of, 10–11, 15–16, 131–132, 138,
142
location of, 11–12neural integration and, 301–302
Linguistic representation, 168–169, 172Long-term memory, 36–37Long-term potentiation, 24Lower mode of processing, 254, 258, 259,
268, 275
Lower structures of brain, 10, 11
Main, Mary, 77
Making sense of experience, 327–329Masking internal states, 271Maximizing focus of ambivalent
attachment, 100, 101
Meaning, creation of, 139–143Medial temporal lobe, 10–11Medication, use of, 84, 242, 295Memorial services and sharing of stories,
65–66
Memory
accuracy of, 55–60, 326brain asymmetry and, 197consolidation of, 52–54definition of, 24encoding process of, 25, 27, 28, 36, 52,
332
misconceptions about, 23narrative and, 5, 60–63relationship between emotion and, 47–49stages of, 25–26stress and trauma and, 50–55types and characteristics of, 33See also Explicit memory; Implicit
memory; Retrieval of memories
Mental illness. SeePsychopathology
Mentalizing capacity, 90, 188–189, 200Mental models
attachment, 71–72implicit memory, 29–30, 31themes of narrative, 64
Mental modes and modules, 172–173Mental representation, 163Mental representational processes
attachment, brain asymmetry, and, 185–
190
conceptual/categorical representations,
167–168
consciousness and, 169–172linguistic representations, 168–169localization of, 172–173sensation and perception, 165–167
Mental state resonance, 70–71, 89, 149Mental time travel, 35–36, 40, 332Metacognition, 267–269, 310Mind
description of, vii–viii ,1 ,2
dual nature of essence of, 3–4, 130–131,
261–262Index 391

Mind (cont.)
systems of, 209–211views of, 1–2
Minds, integration of, 309–311Mindsight
adaptive impairment or blockage of, 202–
204
benefits of, 148–149description of, 140, 327development of, 199–201, 329
Module, 209Mood, 130Muscle changes in limbs and faces, 143–
144
Music
brain asymmetry and, 193–194choir analogy of integration, 308–309emotion and, 152–153
Narrative
Adult Attachment Interview (AAI), 77–83,
89–92, 107
integrative function of, 8–9, 323–324interindividual integration and, 333–335making sense of others and, 329memory and, 5, 60–63neural integration and, 330–333remembering self and, 63–64
Natural selection, 215–216, 329“Nature versus nurture,” 18–21Neocortex, 10, 11, 178, 258–262, 330Neural activation patterns as mental
symbols, 162–164
Neural activity, 15–16, 20Neural integration, 301–305, 330–333Neural net profiles
depression and, 228learning and, 24linking of, 134–135neural integration and, 304remembering and, 24, 25–28state of mind and, 208–212
Neurobiology, 9Neurons, 13, 154Neuroscience, 1–2, 3–4Noesis, 35Noetic consciousness, 39Nonlinear dynamics of complex systems.
SeeComplexity theory
Nonshared aspects of environment, 19–20
Obsessive-compulsive disorder, 220–221,
241
Orbitofrontal cortex
appraisal and, 131attachment and, 97, 187attachment and attunement, impact of on,
281
autism and, 200–201function of, 10, 13, 132, 178, 204, 320location of, 12, 280
meaning, creation of, and, 139–140preoccupied attachment and, 106–107response flexibility and, 142, 254–255,
265–266
vertical and lateral integration and, 303
Parenting
attachment and, 282–284“earned” secure autonomous status and,
313
shame and, 279–280shy children and, 20–21, 127
Parents
attachment specificity and, 81–82avoidant attachment of child and, 92–94behavior of and trajectory of child’s
development, 20–21
depressive symptoms in, 129, 246–247narrative of childhood experiences of as
predictor of child’s attachment, 5–6
narrative style of, 45–46paradoxical injunctions in disorganized/
disoriented attachment, 107–110
preoccupied state of, 104–107unresolved loss and disorganized/
disoriented attachment in children,111–116, 119, 294, 296–297
Patterns of activity. SeeNeural net profiles
Perceptual representation, 165–166Phenotype, 20Pituitary, 11Plasticity of brain, 25, 86, 187, 193–194,
285, 295
Posttraumatic stress disorder, 51, 54, 223,
295, 318–319
Preoccupied attachment, 106–107Presymbolic representation, 166Primary emotions, 125–127, 182–183Prospective memory, 30, 297Psyche, 2Psychopathology
attachment and, 83–87complexity theory and, 219–220disorganized/disoriented attachment and,
109, 119
learning and, 194–195recursive processes and, 308self-regulation, dysfunctional patterns of,
241–244
Psychotherapy
ambivalent attachment and, 290–292attachment and, 285avoidant attachment and, 287–290capacity for integration and, 334–335disorganized/disoriented attachment and,
294
“earned” secure autonomous status and,
287
as external constraint, 242392 Index

features of, 221, 231, 268
plasticity of brain and, 295role of, 298–300states of mind and, 227techniques of, 237trauma and grief issues in, 297See also Clinical examples
Rapid-eye-movement (REM) sleep stage,
37–38, 52–53, 61, 332
Reality, experience of, 160Reciprocal communication, 21–22Recollection. SeeRetrieval of memories
Recovery processes in emotion regulation,
258–262
Recruitment of patterns of neurons, 161–
162, 190
Recursive processes, 19–20, 221, 308Reentry process, 169–170, 321Reflective dialogue
description of, 188, 327secure attachment and, 87–88, 333–334See also Mindsight
Regulation of emotion. SeeEmotion
regulation
Remembered present, 169–170Remembering. SeeMemory; Retrieval of
memories
Remembering self, 63–64Representations, 6–7Resilience, 313–314Resistant attachment. SeeAmbivalent
attachment
Resonance
description of, 281, 290dyadic states and, 336–337integration and, 321–322, 335interhemispheric, 184–185solitude as essential for, 235
Response flexibility, 140–143, 159, 254–
255, 265–266, 268, 331
Retrieval of memories
accuracy of, 55–60, 326comparison of explicit and implicit
memories, 39
encoding and, 25–26, 27, 28, 52implicit memory, 29as memory modifier, 42, 332
Retrograde amnesia, 38Reverse-engineering the mind, 31, 328Right hemisphere
autonoetic consciousness and, 176blocking affective expression and,
272
emotion and, 150–152, 181–183mindsight and, 199–201, 326–327narrative and, 330–331specialization of, 179–180, 197, 198“withdrawal” behavior and, 175See also Amygdala; Orbitofrontal cortexSchizophrenia, 20
Schore, Allan
affect regulation, 278developmental overpruning, 85on interactions shaping brain development,
19
orbitofrontal cortex, impacts on, 281shame and humiliation, 279–280
Secure attachment
adulthood, 89–92description of, 67, 70, 74, 75–77, 87–89,
207
mental state language and, 155narrative and, 333parenting and, 32, 282–283peer acceptance and leadership and, 329self-organization and, 223–224
Self, 229–230Self across time, reflection on, 171Self-organization
attachment and, 223–226coherence and, 315–317complexity theory and, 217–220, 238description of, 215, 216dissociative states of mind and, 319–320interpersonal state and, 232–236modification of constraints and, 223neural integration and, 302processes of, 290–291
Self-regulation
description of, 8, 156dysfunctional patterns of, 241–244emotion and, 239–241, 306–307See also Emotion regulation
Self-talk strategies, 248–250, 275Semantic memory, 34, 35Sensitivity and emotion regulation, 247–250Sensory memory, 36Sensory representation, 165Shame, 247, 256–258, 266–267, 268, 271,
279–280, 291
Shy children
brain asymmetry and, 152, 195–196intensity of arousal and, 246parenting and, 20–21, 127states of mind across time and, 227–228
Social emotions, 183–184Social function of emotion, 148–150Social referencing, 121Solitude, importance of, 235Somato-sensory data, 143–144, 146, 154–
155, 246
Spatiotemporal integration, 304–305, 310,
311, 330
Specialized self and self-state, definitions of,
230–231
Specificity of appraisal and emotion
regulation, 250–253
“Split-brain” patients, 177, 180–181Stability of systems, 219, 320–321Index 393

State-dependent processes, 105, 141, 202
State of mind with respect to attachment,
74, 79–80, 81, 83
dismissing, 94–100preoccupied, 103–107secure/autonomous, 89–92
States of mind
across time, 226–231as attractor states, 218changes in response to environmental cues,
213–214
communication and, 69–71definition of, 121, 208, 230dyadic systems and, 231–236function of, 210information processing and, 228–229organizing of, 211–212process from primary to categorical
emotions and, 130
rigidity in, 237sensation and perception and, 166–167windows of tolerance and, 254–255See also Complexity theory
Storage of memories, 25Stories. SeeNarrative
Strange attractor states, 294Strange Situation (Ainsworth), 73–75, 78–
79
Stress
blockage of mindsight and, 203–204effects of, 294–295hippocampus and, 59hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical axis
and, 11
memory and, 50–55psychopathology and, 85remembering and, 47trauma and, 248
Strokes and plasticity of brain, 193Suggestibility of mind, 55–56Syllogistic reasoning, 180–181Symmetrical relationships, 88Synapse, 13Synchronic integration, 311Systems of the mind, 209–211Systems theory, 232
Temperament, 244–245, 255
Tension modulation hypothesis, 125Thalamocortical sweep, 134–135, 184Thalamus, 10Theory of mind. SeeMindsight
Theory of nonlinear dynamics of complex
systems. SeeComplexity theory
Toddlers
attachment in, 32–33explicit memory in, 34–35, 46–47Top-down processing, 165–166
Trace theory, 28Traits and states of mind, 210Transference, 34Trauma
brain development and, 13disorganized/disoriented attachment and,
108–109, 119
effects on states of mind, 211emotion regulation and, 294–298memory accuracy and, 55–60memory and, 51–55psychopathology and, 856results of, 60unresolved loss and disorganized/
disoriented attachment in children,111–116, 119, 294, 296–297
Trevarthen, Colwyn
brain asymmetry, 305cerebral commissures and integration, 303intrinsic motive formation, 173–175, 176,
192, 193, 302
narratives of cooperative awareness, 333virtual other, 101–102, 104
Unresolved loss and disorganized/disoriented
attachment, 111–116, 119, 294, 296–297
“Use-it-or-lose-it” principle of brain
development, 13–14
Valence hypothesis and brain asymmetry,
151
Valence of emotion, 126, 183Value
assessment of, 124, 126emotion as system for appraisal of
meaning, 136–139, 158, 278
memory and, 48See also Appraisal system
Ventral medial. SeeOrbitofrontal cortex
Ventral pathway, 175–176, 178, 305Vertical integration, 302, 303, 311Virtual other in attachment, 101–102, 104,
223–224
Visceral changes, 144Visual representation, 26Vitality affects, 128–130, 273Vocal rhythm matching and attachment,
225–226
Ways of knowing, 196–199
Windows of tolerance, 253–258, 281–282“Withdrawal” behavior and right
hemisphere, 175
Working memory, 36, 37, 134–136, 264,
269–270394 Index