“The Biological Effects of Childhood Trauma”
Michael D. De Bellis, MD, MPH  and Abigail Zisk A.B.
I. Synopsis
Trauma in childhood is a grave psychosocial, medical, and public policy problem that has serious
consequences for its victims and for society. Chronic interpersonal violence in children is common
worldwide. Developmental traumatology, the systemic investigation of the psychiatric and
psychobiological effects of chronic overwhelming stress on the developing child, provides a
framework and principles when empirically examining the neurobiological effects of pediatric
trauma.
Despite the widespread prevalence of childhood trauma, less is known about trauma's biological
effects in children as compared to adults with child trauma histories; and even less is known about
how these pediatric mechanisms underlie trauma's short-term and long-term medical and mental
health consequences. This article focuses primarily on the peer-reviewed literature on the
neurobiological sequelae of childhood trauma in children and adults with histories of childhood
trauma. We also review relevant studies of animal models of stress to help us better understand the
psychobiological effects of trauma during development. Next, we review the neurobiology of
trauma, its clinical applications and the biomarkers that may provide important tools for clinicians
and researchers, both as predictors of posttraumatic stress symptoms and as useful tools to monitor
treatment response. Finally, we offer suggestions for future researchers.
Keywords
Childhood trauma; developmental traumatology; developmental psychopathology; posttraumatic
stress symptoms; stress; biological stress systems; brain development; genes; polymorphisms;
epigenetics; cortisol
III. Introduction
Trauma in childhood has serious consequences for its victims and for society. For the
purposes of this critical review, childhood trauma is defined according to the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders IV and V as exposure to actual or threatened death,
serious injury, or sexual violence [1, 2]. This includes experiences of direct trauma
exposure, witnessing trauma or learning about trauma that happened to a close friend or
relative. In children, motor vehicle accidents, bullying, terrorism, exposure to war, child
maltreatment (physical, sexual, and emotional abuse; neglect) and exposure to domestic and
community violence are common types of childhood traumas that result in distress,
© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Corresponding author: Michael D. De Bellis MD, MPH Professor of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences Director Healthy Childhood
Brain Development and Developmental Traumatology Research Program Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences Duke
University Medical Center Box 104360, Durham NC, 27710 919-683-1190 ext 351; fax 919-682-7805 michael.debellis@duke.edu.
Publisher©s Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . 2014 April ; 23(2): 185–222. doi:10.1016/j.chc.2014.01.002.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript

posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and posttraumatic stress symptoms (PTSS). Childhood
traumas, particularly those that are interpersonal, intentional, and chronic are associated with
greater rates of PTSD [3], PTSS [4, 5], depression [6] and anxiety [7], antisocial behaviors
[8] and greater risk for alcohol and substance use disorders [9-12].
The traditional categorical cluster of symptoms that form the diagnosis of PTSD are each
associated with differences in biological stress symptoms and brain structure and function;
and are thought to individually contribute to delays in or deficits of multisystem
developmental achievements in behavioral, cognitive and emotional regulation in
traumatized children and lead to PTSS and co-morbidity [13]. Thus, we examine PTSD as a
dimensional diagnosis encompassing a range of pathological reactions to severe stress,
rather than as a dichotomous variable.
Developmental traumatology, the systemic investigation of the psychiatric and
psychobiological effects of chronic overwhelming stress on the developing child, provides
the framework used in this critical review of the biological effects of pediatric trauma.[13]
This field builds on foundations of developmental psychopathology, developmental
neuroscience, and stress and trauma research. The DSM-IV-TR diagnosis of PTSD is made
when criterion A, a Type A trauma, is experienced and when three clusters of categorical
symptoms are present for more than one month after the traumatic event(s). These three
clusters are Criterion B: intrusive reexperiencing of the trauma(s), Criterion C: persistent
avoidance of stimuli associated with the trauma(s), and Criterion D: persistent symptoms of
increased physiological arousal.[1] These criteria are complex and each Criterion is thought
to be associated with dysregulation of at least one major biological stress system as well as
several different brain circuits. This makes both the psychotherapeutic and the
psychopharmacological treatment of individuals with early trauma complex and challenging.
Criterion symptoms have an experimental basis in classical and operant conditioning theory,
where animals learn to generalized behaviors based on previous experiences or
“reinforcements”[14] and in animal models of learned helplessness where animals under
conditions of uncontrollable shock do not learn escape behaviors, and have exaggerated fear
responses as well as social isolation and poor health [15]. For example, Cluster B
reexperiencing and intrusive symptoms can best be conceptualized as a classically
conditioned response that is mediated by the serotonin system and is similar in some ways to
the recurrent intrusive thoughts experienced in obsessive compulsive disorder, where
serotonin and norepinephrine transmitter deficits play an important role [16]. An external or
internal conditioned stimulus (e.g., the traumatic trigger) activates unwanted and distressing
recurrent and intrusive memories of the traumatic experience(s) (e.g., the unconditioned
stimulus). However, other Criterion B symptoms, such as nightmares or night terrors, may
involve the dysregulation of multiple neurotransmitter systems (serotonin, norepinephrine,
dopamine, choline, gamma-amino butyric acid (GABA) [17]). Criterion C symptoms
represent both avoidant behaviors and negative alterations in cognitions. In the DSM-V,
Criterion C was divided into avoidant behaviors and Criterion D negative alterations in
cognitions [2]. Avoidant behaviors can be thought of as ways to control painful and
distressing reexperiencing of symptoms. These symptoms are likely associated with the
dopamine system and overactivation of the opioid system and associated with anhedonia and
numbing of responses [18]. In the DSM-IV the former Criterion D persistent symptoms of
increased physiological arousal and reactivity is now Criterion E, and likely involves
dysregulation of several biological stress systems [13, 19] as discussed in further detail
below.
We will review the known differences in pediatric victims’ stress biology compared to those
children who have not experienced trauma. These differences are likely the causes of theDe Bellis and A.B. Page 2
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript

greater rates of psychopathology (PTSD, depression, disruptive behaviors, suicidality,
substance use disorders) and of the common medical disorders (cardiovascular disease,
obesity, chronic pain syndromes, gastrointestinal disorders, immune dysregulation) seen in
child victims [20]. Throughout, we will associate the relationship to biological stress
systems and common stress symptoms. On many levels, childhood trauma can be regarded
as “an environmentally induced complex developmental disorder”[13].
Exposure to a traumatic event or series of chronic traumatic events (e.g., child maltreatment)
activates the body's biological stress response systems [21-23]. Stress activation has
behavioral and emotional effects that are similar to individual PTSS symptoms [24]. Further,
an individual's biological stress response system is made up of different, interacting systems,
that work together to direct the body's attention toward protecting the individual against
environmental life threats and to shift metabolic resources away from homeostasis and
toward a “fight or flight” (and/or freezing) reaction [19, 25]. The stressors associated with
the traumatic event are processed by the body's sensory systems through the brain's
thalamus, which then activates the amygdala, a central component of the brain's fear
detection and anxiety circuits. Cortisol levels become elevated through transmission of fear
signals to neurons in the prefrontal cortex, hypothalamus, and hippocampus, and activity
increases in the locus coeruleus and sympathetic nervous system. Subsequent changes in,
catecholamine levels contribute to changes in heart rate, metabolic rate, blood pressure, and
alertness [19]. This process also leads to the activation of other biological stress systems.
In the review of the pertinent literature section, we will review the main biological stress
response systems. We will focus on the limbic-hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (LHPA) axis,
and the locus coeruleus-norepinephrine/sympathetic nervous system (SNS) or catecholamine
system. We will also review the serotonin system, oxytocin and the oxytocin system, the
immune system, and new data in genetic and epigenetic factors and gene-environment
interactions that influence these systems and contribute to an individual's experience of
vulnerability and resilience to childhood trauma. For each of these systems, we will provide
an explanation of the mechanisms that drive them, followed by an examination of how these
systems compare in children and adults who have been exposed to childhood trauma,
thereby highlighting how early life adversity can disrupt the body's ability to regulate its
response to stress.
Experiencing trauma during development along with dysregulation of biological stress
systems can adversely impact childhood brain development [13] and we will discuss brain
imaging studies in children who experienced trauma and adults with trauma histories.
Recently, the field of neuroscience has become increasingly aware of gender as an important
moderator of experience, so throughout, we review peer reviewed publications that highlight
gender differences, if available. Little is known about trauma's neurobiological, genetic, and
epigenetic effects in children as compared to adults with trauma histories. Since longitudinal
psychobiological research in pediatric trauma is a severely understudied area, most of our
review will be based on cross-sectional studies. Although we will highlight studies where
longitudinal research is available, more longitudinal research in trauma-exposed children is
needed to understand the pediatric mechanisms underlying trauma's short-term and long-
term adverse effects in adolescence and adulthood. We will review the clinical applications
of this knowledge and discuss how stress related biomarkers may provide important tools for
clinicians and researchers to objectively examine predictors of PTSS and to monitor
treatment response. We then offer suggestions for future directions.
A literature search of Pubmed and PsychInfo articles published to 2013 using keywords and
MeSH terms “childhood,” “trauma,” “stress,” and/or “posttraumatic stress,” where crossed
individually with “hypothalamic pituitary axis (HPA)”, “corticotrophin releasing hormone”De Bellis and A.B. Page 3
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript

corticotrophin releasing factor,” “immune,” “serotonin,” “dopamine,” “oxytocin,” “brain,”,
“brain imaging,” “brain structure,” “brain function,” “cognitive,” “genes,”
“polymorphisms,” and “epigenetics,” that were limited to the English language, were
reviewed and selected for this critical review. Trauma studies involving physical head
trauma or medical illnesses were not included. Our criteria were that the articles be peer-
reviewed and methodologically sound, with emphasis placed on the paucity of longitudinal
studies in this field. When reviews were needed to describe the foundations of biological
stress systems and brain development, meta-analyses or peer-reviewed critical reviews
published by known stress researchers were cited.
IV. Review of the pertinent literature: The Neurobiology of Biological Stress Systems
Limbic-Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Adrenal (LHPA) Axis
The LHPA axis plays a central role in regulating the body's response to stress and is the
most studied biological stress system in animals and humans. Activation of the LHPA axis
triggers the hypothalamus to secrete corticotrophin releasing hormone (CRH). This
neuropeptide, also called corticotrophin releasing factor (CRF), is a key mediator of the
stress response [26]. The term CRH is used when describing its function in the
neuroendocrine system and the term CRF is commonly used when describing its function as
a neurotransmitter. However the term CRH is the older term and authors are not always
consistent in using these rules. CRH stimulates the release of adrenocorticotrophic hormone
(ACTH) by binding to CRH receptors in the anterior pituitary. ACTH in turn binds to G
protein-coupled receptors in the adrenal cortex, especially in the zona fasciculata of the
adrenal glands. ACTH also stimulates the secretion of cortisol, a glucocorticoid hormone
that plays an important role throughout the central nervous system (CNS). Cortisol activates
glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid receptors, which are located and expressed throughout
the brain. Glucocorticoid receptors act as transcription factors and regulate gene expression
for metabolism and immune function, as well as for cognitive and brain development [27].
Increased levels of cortisol suppress the immune system, gluconeogenesis, and inhibit its
own secretion via negative feedback to glucocorticoid receptors in the hippocampus [19].
CRF is widely distributed throughout the brain and is involved in the stress response and
learning and memory [28]. Cortisol regulates the stress response system both in the
hippocampus and medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), where it works to attenuate the stress
response, and in the medial and central nuclei of the amygdala, where it works to promote
the stress response via CRF-1 receptors [29]. Through negative feedback, cortisol controls
its own secretion, inhibiting the hypothalamus’ release of CRH and the pituitary's release of
ACTH, thereby bringing the body back to a state of homeostasis rather than arousal[19].
Cortisol levels have a consistent diurnal pattern where levels are typically close to their peak
during morning awakening, rise further in the 20-minute period after awakening and then
progressively fall, reaching the nadir in the afternoon in children [30] adolescents [31], and
adults [32]. Furthermore, cortisol levels and pituitary volumes increase with age [33].
The LHPA Axis and Childhood Trauma
Exposure to severe stress and trauma in youth can disrupt the regulatory processes of the
LHPA axis across the life span in both animals and humans [26, 27, 34-36]. In animals,
injections of CRF in early life produces a delayed effect in later life that is associated with
reduced cognitive function, reduced number of number of CA3 hippocampal neurons, and
decreased branching of hippocampal pyramidal neurons [37, 38]. Although the pediatric
trauma literature suggest that the LHPA system is dysregulated in youth exposed to trauma,
the cortisol regulation data seem contradictory, where baseline morning and 24-hour cortisol
concentrations showed no differences [39, 40] , were higher [41-47] or in a few studies,
lower[47-49] compared to youth without trauma. Additionally, no cortisol responseDe Bellis and A.B. Page 4
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript

differences [39, 50, 51], blunted cortisol responses[52], and increased cortisol concentration
responses [53, 54] have been reported in maltreated children and adults with histories of
childhood maltreatment under psychological and pharmacological challenges. Other
measures of the LHPA axis such as ACTH also show these contradictory findings where
both blunted [39, 55] and increased [50, 53, 54, 56] ACTH levels have been reported in
maltreated depressed children and adults with histories of childhood maltreatment under
psychological and pharmacological challenges. Furthermore, in one meta-analysis, lower
morning but higher afternoon/evening cortisol levels, a flatter diurnal rhythm, and greater
daily cortisol output were seen in adults retrospectively reporting trauma[47]; while another
meta-analysis demonstrated that individuals with adulthood trauma exposure and adults with
PTSD showed no differences in cortisol levels [57], indicating that the developing LHPA
axis is vulnerable to dysregulation as a result of childhood trauma.
As outlined by De Bellis [13, 39, 42] , the discrepant findings described above may be
related to several mediator and moderator mechanisms. A detailed examination of the
factors associated with these mechanisms is important in studies endophenotyping an
individual's response to the effects of early trauma on the development of biological stress
systems. Endophenotyping is a term which is used to describe emotional and behavioral
symptoms into stable phenotypes or observable traits with genetic associations. Identifying
endophenotypes in traumatized children will be an important new tool for novel approaches
to treatments such as personalized medicine [58]. Several of these mediation and moderation
mechanisms for the biological effects of trauma on the developing child can be found in a
previously published critical review (i.e., Figure 2[13]) and twelve updated mechanisms are
detailed below for the LHPA system as this system is the most studied, providing the most
data to synthesize into mechanisms (see Figure 1). Other biological stress systems will be
reviewed and these mechanisms discussed only if there are published data available.
1. Permanent changes occur as a result of childhood trauma onset— Elevated
central CRH and CRF occurs with the onset of trauma. While this CRF elevation persists
into adulthood; initial elevations of ACTH and cortisol levels become attenuated with
chronic exposure to elevated CRH (a.k.a. CRF). High CRH in turn causes adaptive down-
regulation of pituitary CRH and neural CRF receptors after trauma onset. These ideas agree
with McEwen's [26] theory of allostatic load, which hypothesizes that organisms adapt to re-
regulate psychobiological responses to chronic stress to prevent physical harm to the
organism. Increasing allostatic load over the lifespan, however, increases vulnerability to
stress disorders in response to new stressors. Thus, this down-regulation of CRF receptors
may be an adaptive mechanism that regulates pituitary hypertrophy (a finding seen in
maltreated children with PTSD[59]); while a down-regulation of CRF receptors would make
neurons less responsive to CRF induced neuronal damage and seizures [60, 61]. It should be
noted that the opposite of chronic stress (i.e. environmental enrichment) delays seizures and
neuronal damage in seizure prone animals through a CRF mechanism [62]. In support of this
idea, higher levels of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) CRF are seen in juvenile primates raised
under unpredictable and adverse early rearing conditions [63] which longitudinally persists
into young adulthood[64]. CSF CRF levels are higher in adults with childhood trauma
histories [20]. In combat-related PTSD, elevated levels of central CRH were found [65, 66];
childhood trauma is also a risk factor for a diagnosis of PTSD after combat experiences [67].
Chronically elevated CRF causes generalized arousal, anxiety, aggression, hypervigiliance,
and stimulation of the sympathetic nervous system (SNS), all core symptoms of the PTSD
hyperarousal cluster [24]. It also causes inhibition of feeding and sexual behavior, core
symptoms of major depression, another common outcome of traumatic experiences in
childhood [68].De Bellis and A.B. Page 5
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript

2. Childhood trauma re-regulates biological stress systems— The long-term
consequence of early trauma experiences and elevated CRF resets the regulation of the
LHPA axis so that ACTH and cortisol secretions are set at lower 24-hour levels during
baseline and non-stressful conditions. Adult studies of victims of childhood trauma
consistently show lower cortisol levels [47, 69]. In a meta-analysis, one of the most robust
findings was that the longer the time since the trauma, the lower the morning cortisol, daily
cortical volume, ACTH and postdexamethasone cortisol levels [47]. Since the adult PTSD
studies focus on past trauma, the latter hypothesis may best explain the main differences in
the data in childhood PTSD studies, where higher baseline cortisol levels were reported in
most pediatric studies [41-47]; while lower 24 hour cortisol levels were seen in adults
maltreated in youth [69]. This attenuation hypothesis is supported by data from the only
longitudinal psychobiological study published to date; where nonstress cortisol levels were
assessed at six time points from childhood through young adulthood in sexually abused and
non-abused girls. In this study, nonstress cortisol activity was initially significantly higher in
sexually abused girls (post abuse disclosure) compared to non-abused girls; but cortisol
activity was significantly attenuated starting in adolescence and significantly lower during
young adult follow-up compared to non-abused females [70].
3. Priming also called sensitization occurs as a result of childhood trauma—
Priming occurs as a reflection of chronic compensatory adaptation of the LHPA axis long
after trauma exposure, and it may be more likely to occur after pubertal maturation. Thus,
studies which show greater cortisol or ACTH response after childhood trauma exposure may
be the result of “priming.” LHPA axis regulation is affected by other hormones that are
stress mediated such as arginine vasopressin and the catecholamines, both of which act
synergistically with CRH.[19] A ‘primed system’ will ‘hyper’-respond during acute stress or
during the occurrence of traumatic reminders because of the interactive neuroendocrine and
neurotransmitter effects activated by current life stressors on the dysregulated LHPA axis.
Another term used to describe priming is sensitization, defined as enhanced neuroendocrine,
autonomic and behavioral responsiveness to stress as well as LHPA axis dysregulation [20,
71]. Thus, when a new emotional stressor or traumatic reminder is experienced, the LHPA
axis response will be enhanced (higher ACTH and higher cortisol levels). This has been seen
in findings of increased ACTH secretion in depressed, abused youth who were continuing to
experience chronic adversity [50] as well as in depressed women with a history of abuse
who reported more recent chronic mild stress than abused women without major depressive
disorder, who had blunted ACTH responses to CRF [56]. In a study of post institutionalized
children that examined the effect of interactions between children and their caregivers, basal
cortisol levels increased in response to parental interactions only in children who had
previously been exposed to severe neglect from institutional rearing [72]. In addition, a
prolonged elevation in cortisol levels occurred only when the previously neglected children
were interacting with their caregivers, as interactions with unfamiliar adults led to similar
cortisol levels in previously neglected and non-neglected children. These results therefore
illustrated that previously neglected children generalized caregiver interactions as traumatic
reminders and stressful experiences and thus demonstrated a disruption in the regulatory
processes of the LHPA axis in response to these social interactions. Moreover, in adults with
a history of child abuse, higher cortisol levels occur after exposure to traumatic reminders
compared to neutral memories [73]. These results are the effects of ‘priming’ or
sensitization.
4. Trauma timing and duration influence biological stress systems— Timing of
trauma such as duration (single episode or chronic), age of trauma onset and stage of
development influence cortisol levels post trauma. Cross-sectional studies show that trauma
in infant primates [74] and very young or prepubertal children living in orphanages showDe Bellis and A.B. Page 6
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript

low morning and daytime cortisol production [75], suggesting that prepubertal children may
be more sensitive to negative feedback control mechanisms for cortisol output than older
school-age children who show higher cortisol levels [41-47]. Sexually abused prepubertal
children with major depression exhibited significantly lower mean baseline ACTH
concentrations over the first 4 hours after sleep onset compared with control children[76].
Results of these cross-sectional studies suggest tight down-regulation of ACTH and cortisol
due to elevated central CRF in very young children. Pituitary volumes increased with age
[59] along with increasing cortisol levels, which are also associated with increasing body fat
[77]. Significantly larger pituitary volumes are seen in pubertal and postpubertal maltreated
children and adolescents with PTSD compared with non-maltreated controls [59]. Thus,
elevated central CRH levels may lead to pituitary hypertrophy in traumatized children,
which may be most pronounced during very early childhood and puberty, due to trophic
factors. An adaptive response to elevated CRH levels, particularly during the sensitive
periods of very early childhood and adolescence to elevated CRH levels, must be down-
regulation of CRH receptors, or the resultant high cortisol levels would result in medical
illness and brain structure damage. Tight control of cortisol secretion in infancy and
attenuation of cortisol secretion after trauma onset and in response to increasing levels of
cortisol that occur with increasing age and puberty are in accord with the theory of allostatic
load [26], which hypothesizes that organisms adapt to chronic stress to prevent physical
harm.
5. Individual differences in response to childhood trauma are associated with
different types of biological stress system regulation— Individual differences in
behavioral and emotional responses are associated with different types of LHPA axis
dysregulation. Most studies show LHPA axis dysregulation consistent with elevated central
CRF in youth who experience childhood trauma and depressive and anxiety symptoms [39,
41-47, 50, 78-80] or co-morbid internalizing and internalizing behaviors [42, 79]; while
traumatized children with marked disruptive behavioral disorders or anti-social behaviors
show lower cortisol levels [81].In addition, in a study of adults with moderate to severe child
maltreatment histories and no diagnosable psychopathology, lower concentrations of cortisol
and ACTH were seen in response to the Trier Social Stress Test compared to healthy adults
without maltreatment histories [82], further suggesting that elevated central CRF is likely
seen as a result of maltreatment even in resilient outcomes.
6. Early trauma type and trauma severity influence biological stress systems
—Certain trauma types and increased overall trauma severity are more likely to result in
LHPA dysregulation. For example, children who suffered from physical and sexual abuse
occurring in the first 5 years of life were more likely to experience internalizing symptoms
and LHPA axis dysregulation than those who suffered from abuse occurring after age 5, or
from neglect, or emotional abuse [40]. Increasing severity of childhood trauma is associated
with dysregulation of the LHPA axis. Children who experienced multiple maltreatment or
those who experienced severe sexual abuse were more likely to have elevated cortisol levels
[44]. Furthermore, in maltreated children with PTSD, 24 hour urinary cortisol
concentrations correlated positively with increased trauma duration, and with PTSD
intrusive and hyperarousal symptoms [42].
7. Genetic factors influence biological stress system responses to childhood
trauma— LHPA-related genetic factors influence the effect of childhood trauma on the
LHPA axis and its associated outcomes. Gene × environment interplay is important for the
expression of both negative and resilience outcomes following childhood trauma. Gene x
environment investigations are a relatively new area of study, so these data should be
considered preliminary since this part of the field is still in its infancy.De Bellis and A.B. Page 7
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Polymorphisms are normal variations in genes, which code for important proteins that build
the body and its functions. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are the most common
type of genetic variation. Specific polymorphisms that are needed to form LHPA axis
related structures (CRH and glucocorticoid receptors) appear to moderate the effect of child
abuse on the risk for childhood neuroticism and adult depressive symptoms. The brain's
CRH type 1 receptors (CRHR1) are located throughout the brain [27] and, when activated,
produce symptoms of anxiety and depression [24, 83].
There are few studies of gene × environment interplay in children. In one study, physically
abused, emotionally abused, and neglected children who carried two copies of the TAT
haplotype of the CRHR1 had significantly higher levels of neuroticism, a prelude to anxiety
and depression, than non-maltreated children who had two copies of the TAT haplotype
[84]. However, in this study, sexually abused children and children who had experienced 3
or 4 types of abuse, who had two copies of the TAT haplotype appeared to be protected
from neuroticism compared to children who experienced other types of maltreatment [84].
In a follow-up study of these children, only maltreated children who carried two copies of
the TAT haplotype exhibited a blunted slope of diurnal cortisol change, a sign of increasing
allostatic load and dysregulation of the LHPA axis. However, the CRHR1 haplotype groups
(zero or one copy vs. two copies) were not related to internalizing symptoms [85].
In contrast, one study of adult carriers of both the TCA (i.e., T-alleles, formed of SNP,
rs7209436, and C allele formed by SNP rs4792887) and TAT haplotypes (i.e., A-allele
formed of SNP rs110402) as well as the 2 SNPs (rs7209436 and rs242924) located in intron
1 of the CRHR1 gene, were significantly protected from having major depression despite
histories of child abuse [86]. This finding was replicated in a relatively large study of
women with child maltreatment [87], and in African American men and women [88], but
not replicated in a study of European men and women, who experienced childhood
maltreatment [87]. On the other hand, adults with moderate to severe child maltreatment
histories and the GG polymorphisms of the CRHR1 gene (rs110402) showed a significant
interaction with maltreatment for increased cortisol responses to dexamethasone/
corticotropin-releasing hormone pharmacological challenge compared to those adults with
maltreatment and the A allele [88]. Higher cortisol is a well-replicated finding in adults with
major depression [19, 89]. Furthermore, sex effects may be important in gene × environment
interplay. In another study of adults with child abuse histories, the protective effect of the
CRHR1 polymorphisms (rs110402 A-allele) against developing adult depression and with
decreased cortisol response in the dexamethasone/ corticotropin-releasing hormone
pharmacological challenge were observed only in men, and not in women [90] , a finding
opposite to the one described above [87].
Gene × environment interplay was seen in a prospective study of the FKBP5 gene, a gene
that inhibits glucocorticoid-receptor-mediated glucocorticoid activity [91]. In this study, 884
Caucasians with no history of depression were enrolled at age 12 to 14 years, and followed
for 10 years [92]. Those who were homozygous for the minor alleles and had traumatic (but
not separation (i.e., lost of parent through death or divorce) events (particularly severe child
maltreatment) prior to age 24 years, showed an increased incidence of depression on follow-
up, suggesting that the minor allele of the FKBP5 polymorphism and childhood trauma
interacted to predict adult depression. Three variants in the FKBP5 gene (rs4713916,
rs1360780, and rs3800373) were associated with a failure of cortisol responses to return to
baseline in healthy adults after psychosocial stress, suggesting a genotype-dependent risk of
chronically elevated plasma cortisol levels in the context of acute stress as a possible
mechanism for the increased risk of stress related mental disorders, such as depression and
PTSD in adults with these alleles [93]. Cross-sectional studies have also found interaction
for adults who carry the minor FKBP5 allele and have child maltreatment histories as theyDe Bellis and A.B. Page 8
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript

have increased rates of depression [94], PTSD [95, 96], and suicide risk [97]. Interestingly,
in one cross sectional study, the less common FKBP5 haplotype (H2) was associated with an
increased risk of overt aggressive behavior in adult male prisoners who have a history of
physical abuse[98]. In an imaging study, healthy young adults, were genotyped for 6 FKBP5
polymorphisms (rs7748266, rs1360780, rs9296158, rs3800373, rs9470080 and rs9394309)
previously associated with psychopathology and/or LHPA axis function [99]. Interactions
between each SNP and increased levels of emotional neglect, were associated with
heightened reactivity to angry and fear faces in the dorsal amygdala which suggests a
neurobiological mechanism linking PTSS and depressives symptoms of hyperarousal and
hypervigilience to negative affect and to psychopathology [99]. Hence, investigations of
gene × environment interplay suggest that risk genes may interact with childhood trauma to
produce different adult emotional, behavioral, and neurobiological outcomes.
8. Epigenetic factors influence biological stress system responses to
childhood trauma— LHPA-related epigenetic factors influence the effect of childhood
trauma on the LHPA axis and its associated negative behavioral and emotional outcomes.
Epigenetics is also a relatively new area of study, so the limited data to date will be
described here. The epigenome consists of chromatin, the protein-based structure around
DNA, and a covalent modification of the DNA itself by the methylation of cytosine rings
found at CG dinucleotides [100]. The epigenome determines the accessibility of the DNA to
convert genetic information into the messenger RNA necessary for gene function. Early
traumatic experiences are associated with hyper- and demethylation of specific regulatory
sites in key biological stress system genes including the gene encoding of the glucocorticoid
receptor [101] and the neuropeptide arginine vasopressin (AVP) which is co-localized with
CRH and released with CRH from the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus during
stress [102]. Increased methylation of key biological stress system genes can silence a gene's
activity by making the gene inaccessible for transcription, while demethylation may make a
gene accessible for transcription. Thus, childhood trauma can have a long-term impact on
gene activity without changing an individual's DNA sequence (i.e., genes)[103, 104].
Epigenetic effects may account for the inconsistent main gene and gene x environment
results in the studies previously reported.
Animal studies have provided the first evidence of epigenetic effects caused by early
trauma. Rats developing in optimal environments show less stress reactivity [105]. Because
lactating female Long-Evans rats exhibit individual variation in the frequency of pup
licking/grooming, high or low levels of pup licking/grooming are considered a maternal
phenotype [106]. As adults, the offspring of high licking/grooming mothers show less
plasma ACTH and cortisol responses to acute stress in comparison with animals reared by
low licking/grooming mothers [106, 107]. The offspring of high licking/grooming mothers
also show significantly increased hippocampal glucocorticoid receptor mRNA and protein
expression, enhanced glucocorticoid negative feedback sensitivity, and decreased
hypothalamic CRF mRNA levels, which all indicate decreased stress reactivity as a result of
optimal quality of care.[105] Furthermore, DNA methylation patterns differ in high licking/
grooming versus low licking/grooming offspring. The glucocorticoid receptor promoter
sequence in the hippocampus of adult offspring of low licking/grooming mothers is
hypermethylated and functionally less sensitive to cortisol feedback. Maternal behaviors
also affect other biological systems that are associated with the LHPA axis. Prolonged
periods of maternal separation alter the methylation state of the promoter for the arginine
vasopressin gene (AVP) in the pup, increasing hypothalamic vasopressin AVP synthesis and
LHPA responses to stress, along with memory deficits and learned helplessness behaviors
[108].De Bellis and A.B. Page 9
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In a rodent model of infant maltreatment, abuse and neglect during infancy decreases brain-
derived neurotropic factor (BDNF) gene expression in the adult prefrontal cortex (PFC)
[109]. In addition, these investigators found that chronic treatment with a DNA methylation
inhibitor lowered levels of methylation in male and female rats exposed to early
maltreatment. They also showed not only that infant trauma was associated with poor
mothering in the next generation and that these epigenetic changes in DNA methylation
were passed on from one generation to the next generation, even if the offspring of an
abusive dam (mother rat) was cross-fostered with a non-maltreating dam, thereby indicating
heritability of these epigenetic changes [109].
Increased methylation in a neuron-specific glucocorticoid receptor (NR3C1) promoter was
seen in human postmortem hippocampus obtained from suicide victims with a history of
childhood abuse compared to suicide victims without child abuse histories and controls who
died of non-suicide related causes, demonstrating an association between early trauma and
epigenetic alterations [101]. Decreased hippocampal glucocorticoid receptor expression due
to epigenetic changes likely increased LHPA activity and enhanced the risk of both
depression and suicide in adults who were child abuse victims [101]. These findings link the
previously described data from rats to humans and suggest a common effect of quality of
parental care on the epigenetic regulation of hippocampal glucocorticoid receptor expression
that can lead to health or the LPHA axis dysregulation seen in childhood PTSD and PTSS
and adult depression.
In addition, a preliminary investigation showed that experiencing foster care during
childhood is associated with changes in methylation of genes related to both the HPA axis
and the immune system [110]. This study therefore supports the idea that childhood trauma
may be linked to changes in genetic expression and resulting mental and medical health
problems.
9. Gender differences influence the effects of childhood trauma on biological
stress systems— Gender differences influence the effect of childhood trauma on the HPA
axis. Research involving men and women who were exposed to early trauma but who did
not have any psychopathological diagnoses has shown stronger associations between trauma
and increased CRF levels in men than in women [111]. In children, girls with histories of
physical abuse had higher levels of urinary oxytocin, a neuroendocrine peptide that down-
regulates cortisol and is associated with complex social behaviors, and lower levels of
salivary cortisol following an experimental stressor when compared to non-abused girls;
while abused and non-abused boys did not differ in their hormonal responses [112]. Early
trauma and gender differences are an area of research that warrants further investigations, as
a prospective investigation showed that maltreated males may be more likely to be arrested
for violent offenses as adults [113], thus becoming prisoners and less likely to be involved in
retrospective research studies. This fact can lead to a selection bias in retrospective studies,
and a possibly mistaken idea that females are more vulnerable to early trauma. Early trauma
experiences may lead to greater down-regulation of cortisol due to high levels of CRF and
other stress markers, in males compared to females, findings that are commonly seen in
individuals with antisocial behaviors [81].
10. Social support buffers biological stress system dysregulation and its
associated negative behavioral and emotional outcomes— As adults, the
offspring of high licking/grooming mothers show decreased stress and cortisol reactivity as
a result of optimal quality of care [105]. In preschool children, quality of childcare is
associated with a buffering of hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis to stress [114]. In adult
studies, social support was associated with a decrease in the cortisol response to the Trier
Social Stress Test in men [115]. Furthermore, decreased cortisol response and activity in theDe Bellis and A.B. Page 10
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript

dorsal anterior cingulate, a brain region involved in distress separation, were seen in
response to an exclusion neuroimaging task when daily social support was part of the
research paradigm [116]. Further research is needed on the impact of social support in
traumatized children.
11. Individual biological stress systems dysregulation in response to
childhood trauma and the genes associated with the function of these
systems influence other biological systems during development to contribute
to psychopathology— For example, the LHPA modulates the locus coeruleus-
norepinephrine/SNS system and the immune system [19]. When the hypothalamus releases
CRH in response to stress, the locus coeruleus becomes activated indirectly through the
central amygdala [19]. Serotonin modulates LHPA activity [117]. Furthermore, having more
than one type of a depression risk allele in two different biological stress systems (i.e., the
risk CRHR1 polymorphisms in the LHPA axis and the short allele of serotonin transporter
gene promoter polymorphism (5-HTTLPR) in the serotonin system) is associated with
current depressive symptoms in adults with less severe levels of child abuse and neglect as
measured on the Childhood Trauma Questionnaire [118].
12. Biological stress systems dysregulation in response to childhood trauma
adversely influences cellular, cognitive and brain development [42, 119, 120]
—Human brain maturation is marked by the acquisition of progressive skills in physical,
behavioral, cognitive, and emotional domains. Myelin, a fatty white substance produced by
glial cells, is a vital component of the brain. Myelin encases the axons of neurons, forming
an insulator, the myelin sheath and is responsible for the color of white matter. Myelination
of newly formed neuronal networks increases neural connectivity and parallels these
developmental changes. Brain development occurs with an overproduction of neurons in
utero, increases in neuron size, synapses, and neural connections during childhood and
adolescence, selective elimination of some neurons (apoptosis) with corresponding
decreases in some connections and strengthening of others and corresponding increases in
myelination to hasten these connections. Synapses, dendrites, cell bodies, and unmyelinated
axons, which form the brain's gray matter, decrease during development [121].
Glucocorticoids are important for normal brain maturation including initiation of terminal
maturation, remodeling axons and dendrites and affecting cell survival [26, 122]. Both
suppressed and elevated glucocorticoid levels can impair brain development and function
[26, 122]. During brain maturation, stress and elevated levels of stress hormones and
neurotransmitters may lead to adverse brain development through apoptosis [123-125],
delays in myelination[126], abnormalities in developmentally appropriate pruning [127,
128], the inhibition of neurogenesis[129-131], or stress induced decreases in brain growth
factors[132]. Indeed, maternal deprivation increases the death of infant rat brain cells [133].
Consequently, dysregulation of a maltreated child's major stress systems likely contributes
to adverse brain development and leads to psychopathology [13].
Telomeres are the repetitive TTAGGG sequence at the end of linear chromosomes and with
each division, telomeres get shorter, and are considered a molecular clock for cellular aging
[134]. In a cross sectional study of children who were previously institutionized, telomere
length was shorter than children without such histories[135]. In a prospective longitudinal
study of children, from ages 5 to 10 years, children who experienced two or more types of
violence (measured as bullying, witnessing domestic violence, and physical abuse), have
increased telomere erosion, a marker of premature cellular aging, compared to children who
did not experience violence [120]. This landmark study suggests that children, who
experience trauma, have decreased telomere maintenance, a potential mechanism
(“premature aging”) for adverse brain development, mental health problems, and chronic
health problems in adults with a childhood history of trauma [13, 136].De Bellis and A.B. Page 11
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The Locus Coeruleus-Norepinephrine/Sympathetic Nervous System (SNS)/Catecholamine
System and Childhood Trauma
When the hypothalamus releases CRH in response to a stressor, the locus coeruleus (LC)-
norepinephrine/SNS system becomes activated indirectly through the central amygdala.
Activation of the locus coeruleus causes an increase in the release of norepinephrine
throughout the brain and results in symptoms of PTSD and anxiety [13]. The locus coeruleus
is an ancient brain structure that increases activation of the sympathetic nervous system
(SNS), a part of the autonomic nervous system that controls the “fight or flight or freeze”
response [13]. The catecholamines (epinephrine, dopamine, and norepinephrine) and
corresponding increased activity in the SNS work to generally prepare an individual for
action by redistributing blood away from the skin, intestines, and kidneys and to the brain,
heart and skeletal muscles [137], and by diverting energy through a central dopamine
mechanism that inhibits the prefrontal cortex, from a thinking and planning mode to a
survival and alertness mode [138, 139].
Sexually abused girls with dysthymia demonstrated greater 24-hour levels of total urinary
catecholamines than non-abused girls [140]. Maltreated boys and girls with PTSD showed
greater levels of urinary catecholamines at baseline than non-maltreated healthy children and
non-maltreated children with generalized anxiety disorder [42]. Urinary catecholamines
positively correlated with duration of PTSD trauma and number of PTSD internalizing and
child dissociative symptoms [42]. In a study of children who experienced motor vehicle
accidents, significantly elevated plasma noradrenaline concentrations were seen
prospectively, at both months 1 and 6, after the accident, compared to the non-PTSD and
control groups, further suggesting that higher catecholamines occur as a result of trauma and
PTSD [141]. In a study of police academy recruits, those with early trauma exposure
demonstrated heightened 3-methoxy-4-hydroxy-phenylglycol (MHPG) (the major
metabolite of norepinephrine) response after watching critical incident videos [142]. An
adult positron emission tomography imaging study demonstrated significantly reduced
norepinephrine transporter (NET) availability in the locus coeruleus in PTSD which would
lead to chronic stimulation of the locus coeruleus as a result of increased levels of
norepinephrine. This finding positively correlated with PTSD hypervigilance symptoms.
Furthermore, in a gene x environment analysis, adult carriers of the Val allele of the
Catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) polymorphism (a gene involved in dopamine
degradation) with a history of sexual abuse showed a higher disposition toward anger,
symptoms commonly seen in PTSD patients, compared with adults homozygous for the Met
allele. The Val allele is associated with increased dopamine neurotransmission in the
prefrontal cortex, which is associated with deficits in executive function [138, 139] and
increased risk for impulsive anger. On the other hand, adults with early trauma and the Val/
Val genotype showed increasing levels of dissociation corresponding to increased exposure
to higher levels of childhood trauma [143]. Dissociation is a failure to integrate sense of self
with current and past memories and emotions and is a pathological defense to ward off
anxiety that is also associated with non-intentional antisocial behaviors. Dissociation is a
different construct from depression and anxiety. Thus studies in both children and adults
have consistently demonstrated higher locus coeruleus (LC)-norepinephrine/SNS system
activity associated with childhood trauma and PTSD, while down-regulation of this system
due to trauma may be associated with antisocial behavior and dissociation.
The Serotonin System and Childhood Trauma
Serotonin is a critical element of the stress response system [13]. Serotonergic neurons
project diffusely from the central serotonin raphe nuclei in midbrain to important cortical
and subcortical brain regions (e.g., prefrontal cortex, amygdala, hippocampus) that play
known roles in regulating emotions (e.g., mood), behaviors (e.g., aggression, impulsivity)De Bellis and A.B. Page 12
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript

[144, 145], cognitive function, motor function, appetite, and the regulation of many
physiological processes (e.g. cardiovascular, circadian, neuroendocrine respiratory, and
sleep functions [144, 146]). Serotonin is an important regulator of morphogenetic activities
during early brain development, influencing cell proliferation, migration, and differentiation,
thus influencing child brain development [147]. In preclinical animal studies, decreased
levels of serotonin activity are associated with increased levels of aggressive behaviors in
rodents and primates exposed to early adversity [148]. Mice genetically engineered to lack
the serotonin transport gene show increased LHPA axis activation to stress, suggesting that
serotonin modulates LHPA activity [117]. Disruptions in serotonin's regulatory functioning
are linked with several psychopathological disorders that are commonly seen in children and
adults with childhood trauma. For example, decreased levels of serotonin activity have been
associated with mental health problems such as depression and anxiety [149] as well as with
aggressive behaviors in individuals with personality disorders such as borderline personality
disorder[150].
Early trauma dysregulates serotonin in humans. The serotonin transporter protein is involved
in the reuptake of serotonin from the synapse, and is critical to serotonin regulation in the
brain. The short allele of the serotonin transporter gene promoter polymorphism (5-
HTTLPR) interacts with maltreatment in the development of childhood depression. The
short allele is associated with reduced transcriptional activity of serotonin, so that there is
less central serotonin available in the brain; while the long allele has at least twice the basal
level of transcriptional activity of the short variant [151]. Most studies regarding the effects
of 5-HTTLPR are in adults maltreated as children. A large epidemiological study
demonstrated that there were no main genetic effects, but carriers of the S-allele had a
higher risk of developing depressive and suicidal symptoms when exposed to stressful life
events and childhood maltreatment [152]. Children who were homozygous for the short
allele of 5-HTTPR demonstrated a significantly elevated vulnerability to depression, but
only in the presence of maltreatment; but the presence of positive supports reduced this risk
[153]. Having two short-short alleles of the 5-HTTLPR gene moderated the association
between bully victimization and emotional problems, such that frequently bullied children
were at an increased risk as adolescents for depression or anxiety; the short-long and long-
long genotypes did not confer an increased risk [154]. However other studies have not
shown an increased vulnerability to depression as a function of interactions between the
short allele and maltreatment. Instead, they have shown increased risk with the long-long
allele [85, 155]. One study of 595 youth suggests that genetic variation has a negligible
effect on promoting resilience among maltreated children [156]. In other words, non-
maltreated children with the short-short genotype were more likely to have higher resilient
functioning; while maltreated children with the short-short genotype were more likely to
have lower resilience [156]. This study agrees with controversial meta-analyses that have
found that adverse childhood events had a main effect on depressive outcomes regardless of
5-HTTLPR polymorphisms [157, 158]. The discrepant findings in adults may be caused by
failure to include trauma versus a stressful life event, trauma age of onset, trauma duration,
and trauma type in the gene x environment interaction analyses, as this interaction showing
that adults with histories of child maltreatment were found in another meta-analysis to be at
increased risk for depression [159]. On the other hand, in a forensic sample of 237 men with
elevated levels of child abuse and neglect given the Childhood Trauma Questionnaire,
measures of psychopathy were highest among carriers of the 5-HTTPR long allele and
carriers of the low activity monoamine oxidase A (MAOA) gene [160]. Thus resilience is a
complex issue, as psychopathy as an outcome may be more harmful to society than
depressive symptoms.
Genes associated with the serotonin system have been linked to other adverse outcomes in
the presence of childhood trauma. The MAOA gene codes for an enzyme that selectivelyDe Bellis and A.B. Page 13
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript

degrades the biogenic amines dopamine, serotonin, and norepinephrine after reuptake from
the synaptic cleft, and influences behavioral regulation [161]. Meta-analyses revealed that
the association between early family adversity (particularly between neglect or physical
abuse), and the short version of the MAOA gene, was significantly associated with a general
index of mental health problems, antisocial behavior, attentional problems, and hyperactivity
in boys [162]. Adolescent boys with the short MAOA allele who were exposed to
maltreatment or poor-quality family relations had more alcohol-related problems than
maltreated boys with the longer MAOA allele [163]. Early use of alcohol in youth was
predicted by an interaction of the short alleles of 5-HTTLPR and maltreatment [164].
Further, women with a history of sexual abuse and the short MAOA allele were more likely
to demonstrate alcoholism and antisocial personality disorder than were women with a
history of sexual abuse and the long allele [165].
Furthermore, genetic polymorphisms can have additive genetic effects. Children who were
homozygous for the short allele of 5-HTTLPR, and had the val66met variant of the brain-
derived neurotropic factor (BDNF) gene, and had been maltreated, were at increased risk of
depression.
In summary, the serotonin system and the genes regulating the serotonin system are
influenced by early trauma. However, the field has not yet advanced to the point where
treatment can be tailored to an individual child. More work needs to be done on gene-gene
interactions, possible epigenetic effects, trauma variables, and other factors such as social
supports, to achieve this aim.
The Oxytocin System and Childhood Trauma
Oxytocin plays an important role in interpersonal relationships. Involved in the regulation of
an individual's sexual response and milk production, this hormone is also responsible for the
regulation of a wider range of social interactions, including social memory and cognition,
emotion recognition, empathy, and attachment [166]. In addition, the oxytocin system is
involved in the regulation of the body's response to stress. Research in rats demonstrated a
relationship between oxytocin and the mother's relationship with her offspring, as those
mothers who engaged in more licking/grooming behaviors exhibited higher levels of
oxytocin receptor binding in the amygdala [167]. Similarly, rat mothers who demonstrated
high levels of licking/grooming had increased levels of oxytocin gene expression and a
subsequent increase in dopamine reward production. Mothers who demonstrated lower
levels of licking/grooming behaviors, had lower levels of oxytocin gene expression, thereby
highlighting the important role that oxytocin plays in the attachment bond [168].
Research involving humans has similarly demonstrated that negative life events can disrupt
the body's regulation of oxytocin. Decreased levels of oxytocin have been found in women
exposed to early maltreatment—a relationship that was shown to be especially strong when
the form of maltreatment was emotional abuse [20]. Gender differences have also been
found in the relationship between childhood trauma and oxytocin regulation. Focusing on
oxytocin response to an experimental stressor in abused girls and abused boys, girls exposed
to physical abuse exhibited higher levels of oxytocin, as well as decreased levels of cortisol,
in response to the experimental stress; while there was no difference in hormone response to
the stress in the abused boys [112]. In the Adverse Childhood Experiences Study, a
relationship was found between exposure to early trauma and increased promiscuity[136].
To explain this relationship, the researchers pointed out that disruptions in oxytocin
regulation of social attachments during childhood can lead to high oxytocin and thus
problems forming fast and less discriminate personal attachments during adulthood [136].De Bellis and A.B. Page 14
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript

On the other hand, a strong moderating effect of a positive social environment has also been
found in adults with a specific allele of the oxytocin receptor gene OXTR who had been
exposed to early stress, as increased resilience in adulthood was found only in those
individuals who had been surrounded by a positive family environment during childhood
[169]. Further research is needed on the impact of oxytocin on emotional and behavioral
outcomes in traumatized children.
The Immune System and Childhood Trauma
Activation of the immune system involves the production of cytokines, which promote an
inflammatory reaction to infection or pathogens in the body. Although one of the main
effects of this reaction is to produce the physical symptoms of sickness (e.g., fever, nausea,
and fatigue), activation of cytokines that promote inflammation are implicated in depression,
a common outcome of early trauma [170]. A recent systematic review provided evidence
that supports the relationship between pro-inflammatory cytokines and increased levels of
depression and anxiety in adolescents [171]. Higher levels of plasma antinuclear antibody
titers have been found in girls who have been sexually abused, suggesting that exposure to
this form of stress may inhibit the body's means of suppressing the B lymphocytes, or the
lymphocytes that produce antibodies, thereby leading to the increased levels of the antibody
titers found in the abused girls [172]. Increased levels of inflammatory cytokines, as well as
decreased levels of anti-inflammatory cytokines, have been associated with adult PTSD and
exposure to chronic stress [173, 174]. In women who had experienced early maltreatment,
those who had been diagnosed with PTSD had higher activation levels of T cells than those
who did not have PTSD More specifically, investigators found a positive correlation
between T-cell activation levels and intrusive symptoms of PTSD [175]. Similar results
were found in a study of women with PTSD secondary to physical or sexual abuse during
childhood, where these women demonstrated increased inflammatory and immune
activity[176]. Other investigators demonstrated that greater concentrations of interleukin-6
(IL-6), a proinflammatory cytokine, concentrations were seen during the Trier Social Stress
Test in adults with child maltreatment histories compared to adults without such histories
[177]. Furthermore in a longitudinal study of a New Zealand birth cohort (n=1037), it was
demonstrated that adults with histories of poverty, social isolation or maltreatment had
elevated rates of depression and age-related metabolic disease risks in adulthood including
higher body mass index, total cholesterol, glycalated hemoglobin, and low levels of high-
density lipoprotein, low maximum oxygen consumption, and higher levels of C-reactive
protein, a measure of inflammation [178]. Further children exposed to a greater number of
these adverse childhood risk factors had greater age-related disease risk in adult life [178].
The increased activation of cytokines and dysregulation of the immune system, along with
the other biological stress response systems, such as the HPA axis and the LC/SNS systems,
that occurs in response to early adversity, can lead to hypertension, accelerated
atherosclerosis, metabolic syndrome, impaired growth, and immune system suppression and
poorer medical health in adults with child trauma histories [179].
The Effect of Childhood Trauma on Neuropsychological Functioning and Cognitive
Development
Cross-sectional studies examining maltreatment trauma in childhood have shown lower IQs
and deficits in language and academic achievement in maltreated children compared to
children who have not been exposed to maltreatment [180-185]. The link between early
trauma and IQ has been demonstrated through a twin study, where after controlling for the
effect of shared heritability, domestic violence was associated with lower IQ (e.g., mean of 8
points) in exposed versus non-exposed children [186]. Exposure to trauma in childhood has
also been associated with executive deficits [187-189].De Bellis and A.B. Page 15
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Fewer studies have examined the effect of child maltreatment on a broader, more
comprehensive range of neuropsychological functioning. A study comparing previously
institutionalized children exposed to long periods of neglect with those exposed to brief
periods of institutionalization as well as children raised in their biological families found
that the children who experienced prolonged neglect performed more poorly in the domains
of visual attention, memory, learning and inhibitory control, but that these previously
institutionalized children did not demonstrate deficits when the tasks involved auditory or
executive processing [190]. These results therefore highlight that specific domains of
cognitive functioning may be more sensitive to early neglect than others. Lower
performance in IQ, complex visual attention, visual memory, language, verbal memory and
learning, planning, problem solving, speeded naming and reading and mathematics
achievement were seen in neglected children with and without PTSD compared to
socioeconomically similar controls [191]. Furthermore, PTSD symptom number, and the
failure to supervise, witnessing violence, and emotional abuse variables were each
associated with lower scores in IQ, academic achievement, and neurocognitive domains
[191]. However, neglected children with PTSD due to witnessing interpersonal violence had
lower performance levels on the NEPSY Memory for Faces-Delayed than both neglected
children who witnessed domestic violence and did not have PTSD and children not exposed
to maltreatment or violence indicting that PTSD was associated with impaired consultation
of memory [191]. Childhood PTSD subsequent to witnessing interpersonal violence has also
been associated with lower levels of performance on the California Verbal Learning Test-
Children's Version when compared to those without PTSD, while both PTSD and non-PTSD
groups of youth exposed to domestic violence demonstrated deficits in executive
functioning, attention, and IQ standardized scores[192].
In a study comparing the performance of abused youth with PTSD, abused youth without
PTSD, and non-maltreated youth on comprehensive neuropsychological testing, both groups
of maltreated youth performed worse than the control youth, with deficits in IQ, academic
achievement, and all neurocognitive domains expect for fine-motor functioning[193]. The
maltreated youth with PTSD showed greater deficits in visuospatial abilities than the
maltreated youth without PTSD, and sexual abuse was found to be negatively associated
with language and memory scores. A negative relationship was found between the number
of maltreatment types experienced and academic achievement, demonstrating that
cumulative trauma leads to neuropsychological problems that are unrelated to PTSD
symptoms[193]. Data from the National Survey of Child and Adolescent Well-Being
(NSCAW) study demonstrated that maltreated children who experienced maltreatment
during multiple developmental periods had more externalizing and internalizing problems
and lower IQ scores than children maltreated in only one developmental period suggesting
that trauma duration has negative and cumulative cognitive effects [194].
Longitudinal prospective studies involving adolescents and adults exposed to maltreatment
in childhood agree with the cross-sectional studies and have demonstrated lower IQ scores
and deficits in reading ability [195-200]. The research on the effects of early trauma on
cognitive function indicates that early trauma is associated with adverse cognitive
development and that this is likely reflected in adverse brain development.
The Effect of Childhood Trauma on Brain Development
An early, unexpected, trauma, maternal deprivation, increases the death of both neurons and
glia cells in cerebral and cerebellar cortexes in infant rats [133]. Increased exposure to
cumulative life stress (e.g., exposure to severe marital conflict, severe chronic illness of a
close family member or friend) was associated with poorer spatial working memory
performance and decreased volumes of white and gray matter in the prefrontal cortex of
non-maltreated youth [201]. Pediatric imaging studies demonstrated that both cerebral andDe Bellis and A.B. Page 16
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript

cerebellar volumes are smaller in abused and neglected youth compared to non-maltreated
youth [202-206]. In one research study, maltreated subjects with PTSD had 7.0 % smaller
intracranial and 8.0% smaller cerebral volumes than non-maltreated children [119]. The total
midsagital area of corpus callosum, the major interconnection between the two hemispheres
that facilitates intercortical communication, was smaller in maltreated children [119].
Smaller cerebral volumes were significantly associated with earlier onset of PTSD trauma
and negatively associated with duration of abuse [119]. PTSD symptoms of intrusive
thoughts, avoidance, hyperarousal and dissociation correlated negatively with intracranial
volume and total corpus callosum measures [119]. another study showed smaller brain and
cerebral volumes and attenuation of frontal lobe asymmetry in children with maltreatment-
related PTSD or subthreshold PTSD compared with archival non-maltreated controls [203].
However, these two previously described studies did not control for low socioeconomic
status, which influences brain maturation through ecological variables [119, 207]. In another
study which controlled for socioeconomic status, children with maltreatment-related PTSD
had smaller intracranial, cerebral and prefrontal cortex, prefrontal cortical white matter, and
right temporal lobe volumes and areas of the corpus callosum and its subregions and larger
frontal lobe CSF volumes than controls [205]. The total midsagittal area of corpus callosum
and middle and posterior regions remained smaller; while right, left, and total lateral
ventricles and frontal lobe CSF were proportionally larger than controls, after adjustment for
cerebral volume [205]. Brain volumes also positively correlated with age of onset of PTSD
trauma and negatively correlated with duration of abuse [205]. The larger lateral ventricles
were only seen in maltreated males, suggesting that males are more vulnerable to the
neurotoxic effects of childhood maltreatment. Smaller cerebellar volumes were seen in male
and female maltreated children with PTSD [204]. Younger age of onset and longer trauma
duration were significantly correlated with smaller cerebellum volumes [204]. Smaller
cerebellum volumes were also seen in previously institutionized youth [202]. The
cerebellum is a complex posterior brain structure that is involved in cognitive functions
[208], decision making, reward circuits [209, 210] and the default mode network that is
associated with understanding social intentions [211]. Child maltreatment is also associated
with adverse effects in individual brain structures that are involved in reward and default
network processing. In a large study of 61 medically healthy youth (31 males and 30
females) with chronic PTSD secondary to abuse, who had similar trauma and mental health
histories, and 122 healthy non-maltreated controls (62 males and 60 females), the midsagital
area of the corpus callosum subregion 7 (splenium) was smaller in both boys and girls with
maltreatment-related PTSD compared to their gender-matched comparison subjects [212].
Youth with PTSD did not show the normal age-related increases in the area of the total
corpus callosum and its region 7 (splenium) compared to non-maltreated children [212].
This was an important finding for several reasons. The maltreated and control children were
not prenatally exposed to substances and had no pregnancy or birth trauma, were
psychotropically naïve, and had no history of substance abuse or dependence, thus excluding
confounds which are commonly seen in maltreated children [213, 214] and not addressed in
exclusion criteria in most neurobiological studies published to date. The axons in the
splenium of the corpus callosum myelinate during adolescence and are important to the
posterior reward circuits and the posterior default networks [215]. Additionally, clinical
symptoms of PTSD intrusive, avoidant, and hyperarousal symptoms, symptoms of
childhood dissociation, and child behavioral checklist internalizing T score significantly and
negatively correlated with corpus callosum measures [212]. Children with maltreatment-
related PTSD had reduced fractional anisotropy values on diffusion tensor imaging brain
scans of white matter, indicating less myelin integrity in the medial and posterior corpus, a
region which contains interhemispheric projections from brain structures involved in circuits
that mediate emotional and memory processing, core disturbances associated with trauma
history [216]. Smaller corpus callosum area measures were seen in another anatomicalDe Bellis and A.B. Page 17
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript

magnetic resonance imaging brain study of neglected children with psychiatric disorders
compared to nonmaltreated children with psychiatric disorders, suggesting that smaller
corpus callosum measures may be a consequence of maltreatment [217].
Furthermore, areas of executive function show evidence of adverse brain development in
children with maltreatment-related PTSD. Decreased N-acetylaspartate (NAA)
concentrations are associated with increased metabolism and loss of neurons [218]. For
example, brain NAA levels decrease when someone has neuronal loss such as a stroke. A
preliminary investigation suggested that maltreated children and adolescents with PTSD
demonstrated lower NAA/creatine ratios in the medial prefrontal cortex compared to
sociodemographically matched controls [219]. These findings suggest neuronal loss in the
medial prefrontal cortex, an executive brain region, in pediatric maltreatment-related PTSD.
Another group found that decreased left ventral and left inferior prefrontal gray matter
volumes in maltreated children with PTSD symptoms negatively correlated with bedtime
salivary cortisol levels, further suggesting that early trauma damages executive regions
[220]. One functional imaging study of maltreated children and adolescents with PTSD
symptoms showed significant decreases in inhibitory processes compared to nonmaltreated
controls [221], and another showed impaired cognitive control in adopted children with
histories of maltreatment who were formerly raised in foster care [222]. These investigations
strongly suggest that childhood maltreatment interferes with executive or control circuits,
whose dysregulation is an important contributor to adolescent and adult mental health and
substance use disorders. Thus, childhood trauma can have detrimental effects on the brain
networks that establish an individual's ability to think, and regulate their sense of self,
motivations, and behaviors.
Another important contributor to memory and the default mode network is the hippocampus.
Unlike findings in adult PTSD, where several studies reported hippocampal atrophy [223],
maltreated children and adolescents with PTSD or subthreshold PTSD showed no
anatomical differences in limbic (hippocampal or amygdala) structures cross-sectionally
[119, 203, 205] or longitudinally [224]. However, investigators have demonstrated
functional brain differences in the amygdala and hippocampus of maltreated youth
compared to non-maltreated children [222, 225]. One study suggests that hippocampal
atrophy may be a latent developmental effect of childhood maltreatment [226].
Child maltreatment is also associated with adverse development of brain reward regions
involved in recognizing emotions and social cognition such as the superior temporal gyrus
[206] and the orbital frontal cortex [227]. In carefully screened young adult subjects, those
with a history of verbal abuse and no other forms of maltreatment had reduced fractional
anisotropy on diffusion tensor imaging brain scans of white matter in the arcuate fasciculus
in left superior temporal gyrus, the cingulum bundle by the posterior tail of the left
hippocampus, and the left body of the fornix, indicating decreased integrity in these
language neural pathways[228]. Furthermore, fractional anisotropy values negatively
correlated with verbal abuse experiences [228]. In healthy adult women, a history of sexual
abuse was specifically associated with hippocampal, corpus callosum, or frontal cortex
reductions if it occurred during specific developmental age periods, indicating vulnerable
windows for the brain effects of child trauma [217].
Functional neuroimaging studies of adults with PTSD related to childhood maltreatment
have shown decreased levels of executive and attentional function as reflected by decreased
activation in the dorsal control networks with corresponding increased activation of the
amygdala and hippocampus and other structures of the affective emotional networks during
emotional challenge tasks; suggesting dorsal control network deficits in adult PTSD
secondary to childhood trauma [229-231]. Research using functional neuroimaging ofDe Bellis and A.B. Page 18
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript

children and adolescents exposed to maltreatment has shown similar executive, attentional,
and affective emotional dysregulation [221, 222, 232-234]. Further, previously
institutionalized children demonstrated decreased prefrontal white matter microstructural
organization on measures of diffusion tensor imaging that was associated with
neurocognitive deficits in spatial planning and a visual learning and memory task compared
to non-neglected controls [235].
In another study of healthy adult women with a history of childhood sexual abuse,
investigators found higher T2 relaxation time (an indirect index of resting blood volume) in
the cerebellar vermis than in non-maltreated women, which correlated strongly with Limbic
System Checklist ratings of temporal lobe epilepsy and their frequency of substance use
[236]. In studies of carefully characterized healthy adults who only experienced corporal
punishment without other forms of maltreatment, T2 relaxation times were increased in
dopamine-rich brain decision making and reward regions (caudate and putamen, dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex, substantia nigra, thalamus and accumbens)[237]. In the latter study,
regional T2 relaxation times were significantly associated with increased use of drugs and
alcohol. These studies provide further evidence that specific types of abuse and neglect
contribute to the intergenerational cycle of emotional and behavioral problems as well as
addiction by their detrimental impact on the brain.
Genetic factors interact with childhood trauma to influence brain structure and function. For
example, adults with the Val66MET polymorphism of brain-derived neurotrophic factor
(BDNF) who had a history of child maltreatment had a greater likelihood of depressive
disorders and a smaller hippocampus, highlighting a child trauma x polymorphism
interaction for hippocampal volume reductions [238]. Epigenetic factors also play a role in
brain function. In a genome-wide study of promoter methylation in individuals with severe
abuse during childhood trauma, decreased promoter transcriptional activity associated with
decreased hippocampal expression of the Alsin variants were seen [239]. Adults who were
maltreated as children and committed suicide showed similar hypermethylation in the nerve
growth factor-induced protein A binding site within a glucocorticoid receptor variant that
was associated with decreased glucocorticoid receptor expression in the hippocampus [101].
Mice without the expression of the Alsin gene exhibited more anxiety compared to wild type
mice [240].
Furthermore, there are gender x maltreatment effects on brain development. Gender
differences were demonstrated using anatomical MRI. Maltreated boys with PTSD had
smaller cerebral volumes and larger lateral ventricular volumes than maltreated girls with
PTSD, even though the two groups had similar trauma, mental health histories, and IQ
[212]. In addition, research has shown a relationship between the type of trauma and gender,
as neglect has been shown to have a strong association with smaller corpus callosum size in
boys, while sexual abuse was strongly linked to decreased corpus callosum size in girls
[217]. In a functional MRI study comparing maltreated youth with PTSD symptoms to non-
maltreated youth during performance on an emotional oddball task, left precuneus/posterior
middle cingulate hypoactivation to fear versus calm or scrambled face targets were seen in
maltreated versus control males and may represent dysfunction and less resilience in
attentional networks in maltreated males[241]. These findings were not seen in maltreated
females with PTSD symptoms and gender by maltreatment effects were not attributable to
demographic, clinical, or maltreatment parameters, suggesting that maltreated males may be
dedicating significant functional neural resources to processing affective stimuli in lieu of
cognitive processes, which may lead to impulsive decision-making during states of fear
emotion and thus less resilience in maltreated males [241].De Bellis and A.B. Page 19
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Thus, the data to date strongly suggests that childhood trauma is associated with adverse
brain development in multiple brain regions that negatively impact emotional and behavioral
regulation, motivation, and cognitive function. Molecular aging may contribute to these
mechanisms and lead to a premature aging but less than optimal brain maturation process in
traumatized children as they become adults.
v. Clinical practice application
Understanding the biological effects of maltreatment provide important information that can
be used in practice. The first approach is to ensure a safe environment for the child and
adolescent patient. It is unlikely that any treatment or buffering of the biological stress
systems will occur if a child continues to live in an extremely adverse environment. As
outlined in this volume , evidence based interventions show promise in treating traumatized
children. Similar interventions have not only shown promise in treating traumatized adults
but have showed that the treatment “heals” some of the dysregulations we reviewed in
neurobiological stress systems. Many of victims of trauma have sleep problems [242, 243].
In a longitudinal investigation of sexually abused girls, self-reported sleep disturbances were
seen approximately 10 years post abuse disclosure, compared to control girls, and were
related to current depression, PTSD and revictimization [244]. It was recently demonstrated
that sleep has a restorative function; as during sleep potentially neurotoxic waste products
(e.g., beta-amyloid) are cleared from the brain [245]. Furthermore, inhibition of
catecholamines enhance this waste removal [245]. Therefore, a first step in helping patients
with trauma symptoms is to address any sleep hygiene issues they may have, with
behavioral methods and/or medications if needed.
A review of recent functional MRI studies demonstrated that cognitive-behavioral therapy
can alleviate dysregulation of the fear response and negative emotions associated with
anxiety disorders and predict treatment outcomes [246]. Furthermore, greater left amygdala
activity on fMRI in pediatric patients with non-trauma related anxiety was associated with
greater improvement in anxiety symptoms post treatment [247]. Evidenced-based trauma
therapies likely work by changing brain responses. However, studies of brain function and
trauma in pediatric patients are in their infancy. Psychopharmacological treatments that
target biological stress systems are beyond the scope of this article [248, 249]. Cognitive-
behavioral therapy is the treatment of choice with the most evidenced-based studies
suggesting its effects in children. Most child psychiatrists start with sleep hygiene, then a
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor for symptoms of anxiety and depression or an
adrenergic agent such as clonidine, propranolol, and guanfacine to down-regulate biological
stress systems, if trauma-focus cognitive behavioral therapy and improved sleep have less
than optimal results. Other medications are used to treat co-morbid disorders such as
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Because some childhood traumas (child
maltreatment) are associated with family histories of mood and anxiety disorders, clinicians
should be careful with anti-psychotic drugs as they may be more likely to cause tardive
dyskinesia in these child victims [248]. Although medications are useful for treating certain
symptoms, double blind studies are needed. It is likely that with further imaging and genetic
studies, specific treatments and medication regimens may be tailored for specific PTSD
symptoms and individuals in the future. However, the biological effects of PTSD and its
treatment continue to be understudied.
vi. Important tools for practice
Understanding the biological effects of maltreatment provides important tools one can useful
in practice. Besides self-report instruments to study changes in moods, emotions, and
behaviors during psychotherapeutic and/or pharmacological treatments, sleep can be
objectively measured using bio-markers such as actographs, which are non-invasive digitalDe Bellis and A.B. Page 20
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript

monitoring devices that can be worn on the wrist and measure daily activity, sleep
awakenings, and sleep efficiency. Other bio-markers that can be used to monitor and tailor
treatment and help prevent the negative biological effects of trauma are monitoring
measures of heart rate, body mass index, and post-trauma and follow-up salivary cortisol
and amylase concentrations as these measures predict PTSD [250], and decreasing these
levels during treatment may predict remission.
vii. Future directions
The largest contributor to childhood trauma in the USA is family dysfunction; as almost half
of child onset mental disorders and about a third of adult onset mental disorders are
preceded by child abuse and neglect, and family dysfunction [251]. While the mental
disorders found in maltreating parents and child victims are serious, they are amenable to
prevention and treatment.
Given how detrimental childhood trauma is to an individual's development, more efforts and
social resources are needed for prevention. Studies show that child maltreatment is
amendable to primary prevention. Child maltreatment prevention programs, such as home
visiting [252] during an expectant mother's first pregnancy, aimed at addressing mental
health and parenting concerns of high-risk new mothers, show great promise in preventing
child abuse and neglect. For example, home visiting of an expectant mother by nurses for
low-income, at-risk families has been a well replicated strategy for preventing child abuse
and neglect[253, 254]. Several studies of this Nurse-Family Partnership Program have
demonstrated: improved grade-point averages and achievement test scores in math and
reading in grades 1 through 3 in children during their age 9 follow-up assessment [255];
decreased internalizing symptoms and decreased rates of tobacco, alcohol, and marijuana
use along with improved reading and math scores at age 12 follow-up assessment [256]; and
decreased antisocial behaviors at age 19 follow-up assessment [257]. However, a when a
parent becomes maltreating, even an intensive program of home visitation by nurses in
addition to standard treatment is not enough to prevent recidivism of physical abuse and
neglect [258]. Maltreated children in foster care showed less self-destructive behavior,
substance use, and total risk behavior problem standardized scores and higher grades than
maltreated children who were reunified with their biological families when interviewed
during their 6th year follow-up[259]. These studies indicate that there are two opportunities
to break the cycle of maltreatment. The first opportunity is during the expectant parent's first
pregnancy, to aid in fostering a loving and caring environment for the parent/child dyad, and
to avoid the neurobiological consequences of childhood maltreatment. These types of early
prevention programs are cost effective [260]. However, if this cannot be done, the second
opportunity is to treat victims of maltreatment after the fact.
There are important evidence-based interventions (e.g., trauma-focused cognitive behavior
therapy) for the treatment of PTSD and depression [261] and for antisocial behaviors in
youth with early trauma (e.g., multisystemic therapy [262]). Many of these interventions are
in other articles within this issue. However, we do not know the long term effectiveness of
these programs. We do not have enough professionals trained in evidence-based practices to
treat all child victims, and some youth and their families are simply non-complaint with
these treatments. Therefore, we still need to understand the neurobiological consequences of
chronic stress on a child's developing brain and body so that we can treat the adverse
medical and mental health outcomes of early life stress [263]. A society that places its focus
on an infrastructure of primary prevention would be choosing the less costly option for
victims and for itself.De Bellis and A.B. Page 21
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript

viii. Conclusions
We outlined how childhood trauma has detrimental consequences on the biological stress
systems, and cognitive and brain development. Trauma in childhood is costly for its victims
and for society. Resilience is not a common outcome of childhood trauma. In a longitudinal
study of individuals who had experienced abuse and neglect during childhood, only 22% of
those who had been abused or neglected achieved resiliency based on a comprehensive
assessment of healthy adult functioning, by the time they reached young adulthood [264].
Females who grew up in poverty and were not maltreated were more likely to show
resilience [264]. While we have some important evidenced-based treatments for child
victims, it is in our interest to put in place a national infrastructure of primary child trauma
prevention as the less costly option for future victims and for society. Understanding the
neurobiological consequences of child trauma will assist in treating child and adult victims,
who tend to be more treatment refractory and may have a different endophenotype, than
individuals with medical (including mental health) disorders who do not have such histories.
Nevertheless, more work is needed to understand the neurobiological consequences of
chronic stress on a child's developing brain and body so that we can treat the adverse
medical and mental health outcomes of early life stress in those cases (e.g., warfare, natural
disasters, child maltreatment) where prevention and effective early intervention may not
occur. Such understanding of the neurobiology and genetic influences of child trauma on
child development will lead to novel and effective approaches to treatments (e.g.,
personalized medicine).
Glossary
PTSD posttraumatic stress disorder
PTSS posttraumatic stress symptoms
GABA gamma-amino butyric acid
LHPA limbic-hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
SNS Sympathetic nervous system
HPA hypothalamic pituitary axis
LHPA Limbic-Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Adrenal
CRH corticotrophin releasing hormone
CRF corticotrophin releasing factor
ACTH adrenocorticotrophic hormone
CNS Central nervous system
mPFC medial prefrontal cortex
CSF cerebrospinal fluid
SNPs Single nucleotide polymorphisms
AVP arginine vasopressin
BDNF brain-derived neurotropic factor
PFC Prefrontal cortex
LC locus coeruleus
NET norepinephrine transporterDe Bellis and A.B. Page 22
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript

BDNF brain-derived neurotropic factor
NSCAW National Survey of Child and Adolescent Well-Being
References
1. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders: Fourth
Edition Text Revision. American Psychiatric Press; Washington D.C: 2000.
2. American Psychiatric Association. Trauma- and Stressor-Related Disorders, in Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. Fifth Edition. American Psychiatric Publishing; Arlington,
VA: 2013.
3. Widom CS. Posttraumatic stress disorder in abused and neglected children grown up. American
Journal of Psychiatry. 1999; 156:1223–1229. [PubMed: 10450264]
4. Ford JD, Stockton P, Kaltman S, Green BL. Disorders of Extreme Stress (DESNOS) Symptoms Are
Associated With Type and Severity of Interpersonal Trauma Exposure in a Sample of Healthy
Young Women. Journal of Interpersonal Violence. 2006; 21(11):1399–1416. [PubMed: 17057159]
5. Carrion VG, Weems CF, Ray RD, Reiss AL. Toward an empirical definition of pediatric PTSD: the
phenomenology of PTSD symptoms in youth. Journal of the American Academy of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry. 2001; 41:166–173. [PubMed: 11837406]
6. Widom CS, DuMont K, Czaja SJ. A prospective investigation of major depressive disorder and
comorbidity in abused and neglected children grown up. Archives of General Psychiatry. 2007;
64:49–56. [PubMed: 17199054]
7. Copeland W, Keeler G, Angold A, Costello E. Traumatic Events and Posttraumatic Stress in
Childhood. Archives of General Psychiatry. 2007; 64:577–584. [PubMed: 17485609]
8. Luntz BK, Widom CS. Antisocial Personality Disorder in Abused and Neglected Children Grown
Up. American Journal of Psychiatry. 1994; 151:670–674. [PubMed: 8166307]
9. Clark DB, Lesnick L, Hegedus A. Trauma and other stressors in adolescent alcohol dependence and
abuse. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. 1997:1744–1751.
[PubMed: 9401336]
10. De Bellis MD. Developmental Traumatology: A contributory mechanism for alcohol and substance
use disorders Special Review in Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2001; 27:155–170.
11. Dube SR, Miller JW, Brown DW, Giles WH, Felitti VJ, Dong M, Anda RF. Adverse childhood
experiences and the association with ever using alcohol and initiating alcohol use during
adolescence. Journal of Adolescent Health. 2006; 38(4):444e1–10. [PubMed: 16549308]
12. Dube SR, Felitti VJ, Dong M, Chapman DP, Giles WH, Anda RF. Childhood abuse, neglect,
household dysfunction and the risk of illicit drug use: The adverse childhood experiences Study.
Pediatrics. 2003; 111(3):564–572. [PubMed: 12612237]
13. De Bellis MD. Developmental traumatology: the psychobiological development of maltreated
children and its implications for research, treatment, and policy. Development and
Psychopathology. 2001; 13(3):539–564. [PubMed: 11523847]
14. Kirsch I, Lynn SJ, Vigorito M. The Role of Cognition in Classical and Operant Conditioning.
Journal of Clinical Psychology. 2004; 60(4):369–392. [PubMed: 15022268]
15. Maier SF, Watkins LR. Stressor controllability and learned helplessness: The roles of the dorsal
raphe nucleus, serotonin, and corticotropin-releasing factor. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral
Reviews. 2005; 29:829–841. [PubMed: 15893820]
16. Dell'Osso B, Nestadt G, Allen A, Hollander E. Serotonin-Norepinephrine Reuptake Inhibitors in
the Treatment of Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder: A Critical Review. Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry. 2006; 67:600–610. [PubMed: 16669725]
17. Pagel, JF. The neuropharmacology of nightmares, in Sleep and Sleep Disorders: A
Neuropsychopharmacological Approach. Lader, M.; Cardinali, DP.; Pandi-Perumal, SR., editors.
Springer Science; New York NY: 2006. p. 243-250.
18. Argyropoulos SV, Nutt DJ. Anhedonia revisited: Is there a role for dopamine-targeting drugs for
depression? Journal of Psychopharmacology. 2013; 27:869–877. [PubMed: 23904408]De Bellis and A.B. Page 23
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript

19. Chrousos GP, Gold PW. The concepts of stress and stress system disorders: overview of physical
and behavioral homeostasis. Journal of the American Medical Association. 1992; 267(9):1244–
1252. [PubMed: 1538563]
20. Heim C, Newport DJ, Mletzko T, Miller AH, Nemeroff CB. The link between childhood trauma
and depression: insights from HPA axis studies in humans. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2008;
33(6):693–710. [PubMed: 18602762]
21. McEwen BS. The neurobiology of stress: from serendipity to clinical relevance. Brain Research.
2000:172–189. [PubMed: 11119695]
22. Tsigos C, Chrousos GP. Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, neuroendocrine factors and stress.
Journal of Psychosomatic Research. 2002; 53(4):865–871. [PubMed: 12377295]
23. LeDoux J. Fear and the brain: where have we been, and where are we going? . Biol Psychiatry.
1998; 44:1229–1238. [PubMed: 9861466]
24. Charney DS, Deutch AY, Krystal JH, Southwick SM, Davis M. Psychobiologic Mechanisms Of
Posttraumatic-Stress-Disorder. Archives Of General Psychiatry. 1993; 50(4):294–306.
25. Cannon WB. The wisdom of the body. Physiol Rev. 1929; 9:399–431.
26. McEwen BS. Physiology and neurobiology of stress and adaptation: Central role of the brain.
Physiological Review. 2007; 87:873–904.
27. Lupien SJ, McEwen BS, Gunnar MR, Heim C. Effects of stress throughout the lifespan on the
brain, behaviour and cognition. Nature Reviews Neuroscience. 2009; 10:434–445.
28. De Souza EB. Corticotropin-releasing factor receptors: physiology, pharmacology, biochemistry
and role in central nervous system and immune disorders. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 1995;
20:789–819. [PubMed: 8834089]
29. Herman JP, Ostrander MM, Mueller NK, Figueiredo H. Limbic system mechanisms of stress
regulation: hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenocortical axis. Progress in Neuropsychopharmacology &
Biological Psychiatry. 2005; 29(8):1201–1213.
30. Rosmalen JG, Oldehinkel AJ, Ormel J, de Winter AF, Buitelaar JK, Verhulst FC. Determinants of
salivary cortisol levels in 10–12 year old children: A population-based study of individual
differences. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2005; 30:483–495. [PubMed: 15721059]
31. Susman EJ, Dockray S, Schiefelbein VL, Herwehe S, Heaton JA, Dorn LD. Morningness/
Eveningness, Morning-to-Afternoon Cortisol Ratio, and Antisocial Behavior Problems During
Puberty. Developmental Psychology. 2007; 43(4):811–822. [PubMed: 17605516]
32. Schmidt-Reinwald A, Pruessner JC, Hellhammer DH, Federenko I, Rohleder N, Schuermeyer TH,
Hirschbaum C. The cortisol response to awakening in relation to different challenge tests and a 12-
hour cortisol rhythm. Life Sciences. 1999; 64:1653–1660. [PubMed: 10328525]
33. Hayakawa K, Konishi Y, Matsuda T, Kuriyama M, Konishi K, Yamashita K, Okumura R,
Hamanaka D. Development and aging of brain midline structures: Assessment with MR imaging.
Radiology. 1989; 172:171–177. [PubMed: 2740500]
34. Plotsky PM, Meaney MJ. Early, postnatal experience alters hypothalamic corticotropin-releasing
factor (CRF) mRNA, median eminence CRF content and stress- induced release in adult rats.
Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 1993; 18:195–200. [PubMed: 8497182]
35. Meaney MJ. Maternal care, gene expression, and the transmission of individual differences in
stress reactivity across generations. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2001; 24:1161–1192. [PubMed:
11520931]
36. Sanchez MM, Ladd CO, Plotsky PM. Early adverse experience as a developmental risk factor for
later psychopathology: evidence from rodent and primate models. Dev Psychopathol. 2001; 13(3):
419–449. [PubMed: 11523842]
37. Brunson KL, Kramar E, Lin B, Chen Y, Colgin LL, Yanagihara TK, Lynch G, Baram TZ.
Mechanisms of late-onset cognitive decline after early-life stress. Journal of Neuroscience. 2005;
25:9328–9338. [PubMed: 16221841]
38. Brunson KL, Eghbal-Ahmadi M, Bender R, Chen Y, Baram TZ. Long-term, progressive
hippocampal cell loss and dysfunction induced by early-life administration of corticotropin-
releasing hormone reproduce the effects of early-life stress. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Science USA. 2001; 98:8856–8861.De Bellis and A.B. Page 24
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript

39. De Bellis MD, Chrousos GP, Dorn LD, Burke L, Helmers K, Kling MA, Trickett PK, Putnam FW.
Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis dysregulation in sexually abused girls. Journal of Clinical
Endocrinology and Metabolism. 1994; 78:249–255. [PubMed: 8106608]
40. Cicchetti D, Rogosch FA, Gunnar MR, Toth SL. The Differential Impacts of Early Physical and
Sexual Abuse and Internalizing Problems on Daytime Cortisol Rhythm in School-Aged Children.
Child Development. 2010; 81(1):252–269. [PubMed: 20331666]
41. Carrion VG, Weems CF, Ray RD, Glaser B, Hessl D, Reiss AL. Diurnal salivary cortisol in
pediatric posttraumatic stress disorder. Biological Psychiatry. 2002; 51:575–582. [PubMed:
11950459]
42. De Bellis MD, Baum A, Birmaher B, Keshavan M, Eccard CH, Boring AM, Jenkins FJ, Ryan ND.
A.E. Bennett Research Award. Developmental Traumatology: Part I: Biological Stress Systems.
Biological Psychiatry. 1999; 45:1259–1270. [PubMed: 10349032]
43. Gunnar MR, Morison SJ, Chisholm K, Schuder M. Salivary cortisol levels in children adopted
from Romanian orphanages. Development & Psychopathology. 2001; 13:611–628. [PubMed:
11523851]
44. Cicchetti D, Rogosch FA. Diverse patterns of neuroendocrine activity in maltreated children.
Development and Psychopathology. 2001; 13:677–693. [PubMed: 11523854]
45. Delahanty DL, Nugent NR, Christopher NC, Walsh M. Initial urinary epinephrine and cortisol
levels predict acute PTSD symptoms in child trauma victims. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2005;
30:121–128. [PubMed: 15471610]
46. Pfeffer CR, Altemus M, Heo M, Jiang H. Salivary cortisol and psychopathology in children
bereaved by the September 11, 2001, terror attacks. Biological Psychiatry. 2007; 61:957–965.
[PubMed: 17137565]
47. Miller GE, Chen E, Zhou ES. If it goes up, must it come down? Chronic stress and the
hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenocortical axis in humans. Psychological Bulletin. 2007; 133:25–45.
[PubMed: 17201569]
48. Goenjian AK, Yehuda R, Pynoos RS, Steinberg AM, Tashjian M, Yang RK, Najarian LM,
Fairbanks LA. Basal cortisol, dexamethasone suppression of cortisol, and MHPG in adolescents
after the 1988 earthquake in Armenia. American Journal of Psychiatry. 1996; 153:929–934.
[PubMed: 8659616]
49. King JA, Mandansky D, King S, Fletcher KE, Brewer J. Early sexual abuse and low cortisol.
Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences. 2001; 55:71–74. [PubMed: 11235861]
50. Kaufman J, Birmaher B, Perel J, Dahl RE, Moreci P, Nelson B, Wells W, Ryan N. The
corticotropin-releasing hormone challenge in depressed abused, depressed nonabused, and normal
control children. Biological Psychiatry. 1997; 42:669–679. [PubMed: 9325560]
51. Murali R, Chen E. Exposure to Violence and Cardiovascular and Neuroendocrine Measures in
Adolescents. Ann Behav Med. 2005; 30(2):155–163. [PubMed: 16173912]
52. MacMillan HL, Georgiades K, Duku EK, Shea A, Steiner M, Niec A, Tanaka M, Gensey S, Spree
S, Vella E, et al. Cortisol Response to Stress in Female Adolescents Exposed to Childhood
Maltreatment: Results of the Youth Mood Project. Biological Psychiatry. 2009; 66(1):62–68.
[PubMed: 19217075]
53. Heim C, Mletzko T, Purselle D, Musselman DL, Nemeroff CB. The Dexamethasone/
Corticotropin-Releasing Factor Test in Men with Major Depression: Role of Childhood Trauma.
Biol Psychiatry. 2008; 63:398–405. [PubMed: 17825799]
54. Heim C, Newport DJ, Heit S, Graham YP, Wilcox M, Bonsall R, Miller AH, Nemeroff CB.
Pituitary-adrenal and autonomic responses to stress in women after sexual and physical abuse in
childhood. Journal of the American Medical Association. 2000; 284:592–597. [PubMed:
10918705]
55. Santa Ana EJ, Saladin ME, Back SE, Waldrop AE, Spratt EG, McRae AL, LaRowe SD,
Timmerman MA, Upadhyaya H, Brady KT. PTSD and the HPA axis: differences in response to
the cold pressor task among individuals with child vs. adult trauma. Psychoneuroendocrinology.
2006; 31(4):501–509. [PubMed: 16413134]De Bellis and A.B. Page 25
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript

56. Heim C, Newport DJ, Bonsall R, Miller AH, Nemeroff CB. Altered pituitary-adrenal axis
responses to provocative challenge tests in adult survivors of childhood abuse. American Journal
of Psychiatry. 2001; 158:575–581. [PubMed: 11282691]
57. Klaassens ER, Giltay EJ, Cuijpers P, van Veen T, Zitman FG. Adulthood trauma and HPA-axis
functioning in healthy subjects and PTSD patients: a meta-analysis. Psychoneuroendocrinology.
2012; 37(3):317–331. [PubMed: 21802212]
58. Simon GE, Perlis RH. Personalized Medicine for Depression: Can We Match Patients With
Treatments? American Journal of Psychiatry. 2010; 167:1445–145. [PubMed: 20843873]
59. Thomas LA, De Bellis MD. Pituitary volumes in pediatric maltreatment related PTSD. Biological
Psychiatry. 2004; 55:752–758. [PubMed: 15039005]
60. Ehlers CL, Henriksen SJ, Wang M, Rivier J, Vale W, Bloom FE. Corticotropin releasing factor
produces increases in brain excitability and convulsive seizures in rats. Brain Research. 1983;
278:332–336. [PubMed: 6605787]
61. Weiss SB, Post RM, Gold PW, Chrousos GP, Sullivan TL, Walker D, Pert A. CRF-Induced
Seizures and Behavior: Interaction With Arnygdala Kindling. Brain Research. 1986; 372:345–351.
[PubMed: 3486694]
62. Korbey SM, Heinrichs SC, Leussis MP. Seizure susceptibility and locus ceruleus activation are
reduced following environmental enrichment in an animal model of epilepsy. Epilepsy &
Behavior. 2008; 12:30–38. [PubMed: 17983840]
63. Coplan JD, Andrews MW, Rosenblum LA, Owens MJ, Friedman S, Gorman JM, Nemeroff CB.
Persistent elevations of cerebrospinal fluid concentrations of corticotropin-releasing factor in adult
nonhuman primates exposed to early-life stressors: Implications for the pathophysiology of mood
and anxiety disorders. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science USA. 1996; 93:1619–
1623.
64. Coplan JD, Smith ELP, Altemus M, Scharf BA, Owens MJ, Nemeroff CB, Gorman JM,
Rosenblum LA. Elevations in Cisternal Cerebrospinal Fluid Corticotropin-Releasing Factor
Concentrations in Adult Primates. Biological Psychiatry. 2001; 50:200–204. [PubMed: 11513819]
65. Baker DG, West SA, Nicholson WE, Ekhator NN, Kasckow JW, Hill KK, Bruce AB, Orth DN,
Geracioti TD Jr. Serial CSF corticotropin-releasing hormone levels and adrenocortical activity in
combat veterans with posttraumatic stress disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry. 1999;
156:585–588. [PubMed: 10200738]
66. Bremner JD, Licinio J, Darnell A, Krystal JH, Owens MJ, Southwick SM, Nemeroff CB, Charney
DS. Elevated CSF corticotropin-releasing factor concentrations in posttraumatic stress disorder.
American Journal of Psychiatry. 1997; 154:624–629. [PubMed: 9137116]
67. Bremner JD, Southwick SM, Johnson DR, Yehuda R, Charney DS. Childhood physical abuse and
combat-related posttraumatic stress disorder in Vietnam Veterans. American Journal of Psychiatry.
1993; 150:235–239. [PubMed: 8422073]
68. Kaufman J, Plotsky PM, Nemeroff CB, Charney DS. Effects of Early Adverse Experiences on
Brain Structure and Function: Clinical Implications. Biological Psychiatry. 2000; 48:778–790.
[PubMed: 11063974]
69. Yehuda R, Kahana B, Binder-Brynes K, Southwick S, Mason JW, Giller EL. Low urinary cortisol
excretion in Holocaust survivors with posttraumatic stress disorder. American Journal of
Psychiatry. 1995; 152:982–986. [PubMed: 7793468]
70. Trickett PK, Noll JG, Susman EJ, Shenk CE, Putnam FW. Attenuation of cortisol across
development for victims of sexual abuse. Development and Psychopathology. 2010; 22(1):165–
175. [PubMed: 20102654]
71. Yehuda R. Advances in understanding neuroendocrine alterations in PTSD and their therapeutic
implications. Ann NY Acad Sci. 2006; 1071:137–166. [PubMed: 16891568]
72. Fries AB, Shirtcliff EA, Pollak SD. Neuroendocrine dysregulation following early social
deprivation in children. Dev Psychobiol. 2008; 50(6):588–599. [PubMed: 18683181]
73. Elzinga BM, Schmahl C, Vermetten E, van Dyck R, Bremner JD. Higher Cortisol Levels
Following Exposure to Traumatic Reminders in Abuse-Related PTSD.
Neuropsychopharmacology. 2003; 28:1656–1665. [PubMed: 12838270]De Bellis and A.B. Page 26
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript

74. Boyce WT, Champoux M, Suomi SJ, Gunnar MR. Salivary cortisol in nursery-reared rhesus
monkeys: Reactivity to peer interactions and altered circadian activity. Developmental
Psychobiology. 1995; 28:257–267. [PubMed: 7672458]
75. Gunnar MR, Vazquez DM. Low cortisol and a flattening of expected daytime rhythm: Potential
indices of risk in human development. Development and Psychopathology. 2001; 13:515–538.
[PubMed: 11523846]
76. De Bellis MD, Dahl RE, Perel J, Birmaher B, Al-Shabbout M, Williamson DE, Nelson B, Ryan
ND. Nocturnal ACTH, cortisol, growth hormone, and prolactin secretion in prepubertal
depression. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 1996; 35:1130–1138. [PubMed: 8824056]
77. Dimitriou T, Maser-Gluth C, Remer T. Adrenocortical activity in healthy children is associated
with fat mass. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 2003; 77:731–736. [PubMed: 12600869]
78. Hart J, Gunnar M, Cicchetti D. Altered neuroendocrine activity in maltreated children related to
symptoms of depression. Development & Psychopathology. 1996; 8:201–214.
79. Cicchetti D, Rogosch FA. The impact of child maltreatment and psychopathology on
neuroendocrine functioning. Development and Psychopathology. 2001; 13:783–804. [PubMed:
11771908]
80. Kaufman J. Depressive disorders in maltreated children. Journal of the American Academy of
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. 1991; 30:257–265. [PubMed: 2016230]
81. Susman EJ. Psychobiology of persistent antisocial behavior: Stress, early vulnerabilities and the
attenuation hypothesis. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews. 2006; 30:376–389. [PubMed:
16239030]
82. Carpenter LL, Carvalho JP, Tyrka AR, Wier LM, Mello AF, Mello MF, Anderson GM, Wilkinson
CW, Price LH. Decreased Adrenocorticotropic Hormone and Cortisol Responses to Stress in
Healthy Adults Reporting Significant Childhood Maltreatment. Biological Psychiatry. 2007;
62:1080–1087. [PubMed: 17662255]
83. Stenzel-Poore MP, Heinrichs SC, Rivest S, Koob GF, Vale WW. Overproduction of
corticotropinreleasing factor in transgenic mice: a genetic model of anxiogenic behavior. Journal
of Neuroscience. 1994; 14(5):2579–2584. [PubMed: 8182429]
84. DeYoung C, Cicchetti D, Rogosch FA. Moderation of the association between childhood
maltreatment and neuroticism by the corticotropin-releasing hormone receptor 1 gene. Journal of
Child Psychology and Psychiatry. 2011; 52:898–906. [PubMed: 21438878]
85. Cicchetti D, Rogosch FA, Oshri A. Interactive effects of corticotropin releasing hormone receptor
1, serotonin transporter linked polymorphic region, and child maltreatment on diurnal cortisol
regulation and internalizing symptomatology. Development & Psychopathology. 2011; 23:1125–
1138. [PubMed: 22018085]
86. Bradley RG, Binder EB, Epstein MP, Tang Y, Nair HP, Lui W, Gillespie CF, Berg T, Evces M,
Newport J, et al. Influence of Child Abuse on Adult Depression: Moderation by the Corticotropin-
Releasing Hormone Receptor Gene. Archives of General Psychiatry. 2008; 65(2):190–200.
[PubMed: 18250257]
87. Polanczyk G, Caspi A, Williams B, Price TS, Danese A, Sugden K, Uher R, Poulton R, Moffitt
TE. Protective effect of CRHR1 gene variants on the development of adult depression following
childhood maltreatment: replication and extension. Archives of General Psychiatry. 2009; 66:978–
985. [PubMed: 19736354]
88. Tyrka AR, Price LH, Gelernter J, Schepker C, Anderson GM, Carpenter LL. Interaction of
Childhood Maltreatment with the Corticotropin-Releasing Hormone Receptor Gene: Effects on
Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Adrenal Axis Reactivity. Biological Psychiatry. 2009; 66:681–685.
[PubMed: 19596121]
89. Spijker AT, van Rossum EFC. Glucocorticoid Sensitivity in Mood Disorders. Neuroendocrinology.
2012; 95:179–186. [PubMed: 22076031]
90. Heim CM, Bradley RG, Deveau TC, Musselman DL, Nemoroff CB, Ressler KJ, Binder EB. Effect
of childhood trauma on adult depression and neuroendocrine function: sex-specific moderation by
CRH receptor 1 gene. Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience. 2009; 3:1–10. [PubMed: 19194528]
91. Wochnik GM, Ruegg J, Abel GA, Schmidt U, Holsboer F, Rein T. FK506-binding proteins 51 and
52 differentially regulate dynein interaction and nuclear translocation of the glucocorticoidDe Bellis and A.B. Page 27
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript

receptor in mammalian cells. Journal of Biological Chemistry. 2005; 280:4609–4616. [PubMed:
15591061]
92. Zimmermann P, Brückl T, Nocon A, Pfister H, Binder EB, Uhr M, Lieb R, Moffitt TE, Caspi A,
Holsboer F, et al. Interaction of FKBP 5 Gene Variants and Adverse Life Events in Predicting
Depression Onset: Results From a 10-Year Prospective Community Study. American Journal of
Psychiatry. 2011; 168:1107–1116. [PubMed: 21865530]
93. Ising M, Depping AM, Siebertz A, Lucae S, Unschuld PG, Kloiber S, Horstmann S, Uhr M,
Müller-Myhsok B, Holsboer F. Polymorphisms in the FKBP5 gene region modulate recovery from
psychosocial stress in healthy controls. European Journal of Neuroscience. 2008; 28:389–398.
[PubMed: 18702710]
94. Appel K, Schwahn C, Mahler J, Schulz A, Spitzer C, Fenske K, Stender J, Barnow S, John U,
Teumer A, et al. Moderation of Adult Depression by a Polymorphism in the FKBP5 Gene and
Childhood Physical Abuse in the General Population. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2011; 36:1982–
1991. [PubMed: 21654733]
95. Binder EB, Bradley RG, Liu W, Epstein MP, Deveau TC, Mercer KB, Tang Y, Gillespie CF, Heim
CM, Nemeroff CB, et al. Association of FKBP5 Polymorphisms and Childhood Abuse With Risk
of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Symptoms in Adults. Journal of the American Medical
Association. 2008; 299:1291–1305. [PubMed: 18349090]
96. Xie P, Kranzler HR, Poling J, Stein MB, Anton RF, Farrer LA, Gelernter J. Interaction of FKBP5
with childhood adversity on risk for post-traumatic stress disorder. Neuropsychopharmacology.
2010; 35:1684–1692. [PubMed: 20393453]
97. Roy A, Gorodetsky E, Yuan Q, Goldman D, Enoch MA. Interaction of FKBP5, a stress-related
gene, with childhood trauma increases the risk for attempting suicide. Neuropsychopharmacology.
2010; 35:1674–1683. [PubMed: 20090668]
98. Bevilacqua L, Carli V, Sarchiapone M, George DK, Goldman D, Roy A, Enoch MA. Interaction
Between FKBP5 and Childhood Trauma and Risk of Aggressive Behavior. Archives of General
Psychiatry. 2012; 69:62–70. [PubMed: 22213790]
99. White MG, Bogdan R, Fisher PM, Muñoz KE, Williamson D, E. Hariri AR. FKBP5 and emotional
neglect interact to predict individual differences in amygdala reactivity. Genes Brain Behav. 2012;
11(7):869–878. [PubMed: 22979952]
100. Razin A. CpG methylation, chromatin structure and gene silencing-a three-way connection. The
EMBO Journal. 1998; 17:4905–4908. [PubMed: 9724627]
101. McGowan PO, Sasaki A, D'Alessio AC, Dymov S, Labonté B, Szyf M, Turecki G, Meaney MJ.
Epigenetic regulation of the glucocorticoid receptor in human brain associates with childhood
abuse. Nat Neurosci. 2009; 12(3):342–348. [PubMed: 19234457]
102. Murgatroyd C, Spengler D. Epigenetics of early child development. Frontiers in Psychiatry. 2011;
2(16):1–15. [PubMed: 21556272]
103. McGowan PO. Epigenomic mechanisms of early adversity and HPA dysfunction: considerations
for PTSD research. Frontiers in Psychiatry. 2013; 4(110):1–6. [PubMed: 23346060]
104. McGowan PO, Szyf M. The epigenetics of social adversity in early life: Implications for mental
health outcomes. Neurobiology of Disease. 2010; 39:66–72. [PubMed: 20053376]
105. Zhang TY, Labonté B, Wen XL, Turecki G, Meaney MJ. Epigenetic mechanisms for the early
environmental regulation of hippocampal glucocorticoid receptor gene expression in rodents and
humans. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2013; 38(1):111–123. [PubMed: 22968814]
106. Champagne FA, Francis DD, Mar A, Meaney MJ. Variations in maternal care in the rat as a
mediating influence for the effects of environment on development. Physiol Behav. 2003;
79:359–371. [PubMed: 12954431]
107. Kurata A, Morinobu S, Fuchikami M, Yamamoto S, Yamawaki S. Maternal postpartum learned
helplessness (LH) affects maternal care by dams and responses to the LH test in adolescent
offspring. Horm Behav. 2009; 56:112–120. [PubMed: 19341740]
108. Murgatroyd C, Patchev AV, Wu Y, Micale V, Bockmuhl Y, Fischer D, Holsboer F, Wotjak CT,
Almeida OFX, Spengler D. Dynamic DNA methylation programs persistent adverse effects of
early-life stress. Nature Neuroscience. 2009; 12:1559–1566.De Bellis and A.B. Page 28
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript

109. Roth TL, Lubin FD, Funk AJ, Sweatt JD. Lasting epigenetic influence of early-life adversity on
the BDNF gene. Biol Psychiatry. 2009; 65(9):760–769. [PubMed: 19150054]
110. Bick J, Naumova O, Hunter S, Barbot B, Lee M, Luthar SS, Raefski A, Grigorenko EL.
Childhood adversity and DNA methylation of genes involved in the hypothalamus-pituitary-
adrenal axis and immune system: whole-genome and candidate-gene associations. Development
and Psychopathology. 2012; 24(4):1417–1425. [PubMed: 23062307]
111. DeSantis SM, Baker NL, Back SE, Spratt E, Ciolino JD, Moran-Santa Maria M, Dipankar B,
Brady KT. Gender differences in the effect of early life trauma on hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
axis functioning. Depression and Anxiety. 2011; 28(5):383–392. [PubMed: 21328636]
112. Seltzer LJ, Ziegler T, Connolly MJ, Prososki AR, Pollak SD. Stress-induced elevation of oxytocin
in maltreated children: evolution, neurodevelopment, and social behavior. Child Development.
2013
113. Widom CS. Child abuse, neglect, and violent criminal behavior. American Journal of Psychiatry.
1989; 27(2):251–271.
114. Gunnar MR. Quality of early care and buffering of neuroendocrine stress reactions: potential
effects on the developing human brain. Preventive Medicine. 1998; 27:208–211. [PubMed:
9578997]
115. Heinrichs M, Baumgartner T, Kirschbaum C, Ehlert U. Social Support and Oxytocin Interact to
Suppress Cortisol and Subjective Responses to Psychosocial Stress. Biological Psychiatry. 2003;
54:1389–1398. [PubMed: 14675803]
116. Eisenberger NI, Taylor SA, Gable SL, Hilmert CJ, Lieberman MD. Neural pathways link social
support to attenuated neuroendocrine stress responses. NeuroImage. 2007; 35:1601–1612.
[PubMed: 17395493]
117. Li Q, Wichems C, Heils A, Van De Kar LD, Lesch KP, Murphy DL. Reduction of 5-
hydroxytryptamine (5-HT)(1A)-mediated temperature and neuroendocrine responses and 5-
HT(1A) binding sites in 5-HT transporter knockout mice. J Pharmacol Exp Therarapy. 1999;
291(3):999–1007.
118. Ressler KJ, Bradley RG, Mercer KB, Deveau TC, Smith AK, Gillespie CF, Nemoroff CB,
Cubells JF, Binder EB. Polymorphisms in CRHR1 and the Serotonin Transporter Loci:
GeneGeneEnvironment Interactions on Depressive Symptoms. American Journal of Medical
Genetics Part B: Neuropsychiatric Genetics. 2009; 153B:812–824.
119. De Bellis MD, Keshavan M, Clark DB, Casey BJ, Giedd J, Boring AM, Frustaci K, Ryan ND.
A.E. Bennett Research Award. Developmental Traumatology, Part II: Brain Development.
Biological Psychiatry. 1999; 45:1271–1284. [PubMed: 10349033]
120. Shalev I, Moffitt TE, Sugden K, Williams B, Houts RM, Danese A, Mill J, Arseneault L, Caspi
A. Exposure to violence during childhood is associated with telomere erosion from 5 to 10 years
of age: a longitudinal study. Molecular Psychiatry. 2013; 18:576–581. [PubMed: 22525489]
121. Paus T. Mapping brain maturation and cognitive development during adolescence. TRENDS in
Cognitive Sciences. 2005; 9(2):60–68. [PubMed: 15668098]
122. McEwen BS. The neurobiology and neuroendocrinology of stress. Implications for post-traumatic
stress disorder from a basic science perspective. Psychiatr Clin North Am. 2002; 25(2):469–494.
[PubMed: 12136511]
123. Edwards E, Harkins K, Wright G, Menn F. Effects of bilateral adrenalectomy on the induction of
learned helplessness. Behavioral Neuropsychopharmacology. 1990; 3:109–114.
124. Sapolsky RM, Uno H, Rebert CS, Finch CE. Hippocampal damage associated with prolonged
glucocorticoid exposure in primates. Journal of Neuroscience. 1990; 10:2897–2902. [PubMed:
2398367]
125. Simantov R, Blinder E, Ratovitski T, Tauber M, Gabbay M, Porat S. Dopamine induced apoptosis
in human neuronal cells: inhibition by nucleic acids antisense to the dopamine transporter.
Neuroscience. 1996; 74:39–50. [PubMed: 8843076]
126. Dunlop SA, Archer MA, Quinlivan JA, Beazley LD, Newnham JP. Repeated prenatal
corticosteroids delay myelination in the ovine central nervous system. Journal of Maternal-Fetal
Medicine. 1997; 6:309–313. [PubMed: 9438210]De Bellis and A.B. Page 29
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript

127. Todd RD. Neural development is regulated by classical neuro-transmitters: dopamine D2 receptor
stimulation enhances neurite outgrowth. Biological Psychiatry. 1992; 31:794–807. [PubMed:
1643194]
128. Lauder JM. Neurotransmitters as morphogens. Progress in Brain Research. 1988; 73:365–388.
[PubMed: 2901778]
129. Gould E, McEwen BS, Tanapat P, Galea LA, Fuchs E. Neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus of the
adult tree shrew is regulated by psychosocial stress and NMDA receptor activation. Journal of
Neuroscience. 1997; 17:2492–8. [PubMed: 9065509]
130. Gould E, Tanapat P, Cameron HA. Adrenal steroids suppress granule cell death in the developing
dentate gyrus through an NMDA receptor-dependent mechanism. Brain Research.
Developmental Brain Research. 1997; 103:91–3. [PubMed: 9370064]
131. Gould E, Tanapat P, McEwen BS, Flugge G, Fuchs E. Proliferation of granule cell precursors in
the dentate gyrus of adult monkeys is diminished by stress. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America. 1998; 95:3168–71. [PubMed: 9501234]
132. Pizarro JM, Lumley LA, Medina W, Robison CL, Changa WE, Alagappana A, Bah MJ, Dawood
MY, Shah JD, Mark B, et al. Acute social defeat reduces neurotrophin expression in brain
cortical and subcortical areas in mice. Brain Research. 2004; 1025:10–20. [PubMed: 15464739]
133. Zhang L-X, Levine S, Dent G, Zhan G, Xing G, Okimoto D, Gordon MK, Post RM, Smith MA.
Maternal deprivation increases cell death in the infant rat brain. Developmental Brain Research.
2002; 133:1–11. [PubMed: 11850058]
134. Harley CB, Futcher AB, Greider CW. Telomeres shorten during ageing of human fibroblasts.
Nature. 1990; 345:458–460. [PubMed: 2342578]
135. Drury SS, Theall K, Gleason MM, Smyke AT, De Vivo I, Wong JY, Fox NA, Zeanah CH,
Nelson CA. Telomere length and early severe social deprivation: linking early adversity and
cellular aging. Molecular Psychiatry. 2012; 17:719–727. [PubMed: 21577215]
136. Anda RF, Felitti VJ, Bremner JD, Walker JD, Whitfield C, Perry BD, Dube SR, Giles WH. The
enduring effects of abuse and related adverse experiences in childhood: a convergence of
evidence from neurobiology and epidemiology. Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2006;
256(3):174–186. [PubMed: 16311898]
137. De Bellis MD, Putnam FW. The Psychobiology of Childhood Maltreatment. Child and
Adolescent Psychiatric Clinics of North America. 1994; 3(4):663–678.
138. Arnsten AF. Stress impairs prefrontal cortical function in rats and monkeys: role of dopamine D1
and norepinephrine alpha-1 receptor mechanisms. Progress in Brain Research. 2000; 126:183–
192. [PubMed: 11105647]
139. Arnsten AFT. The biology of being frazzled. Science. 1998; 280:1711–1712. [PubMed: 9660710]
140. De Bellis MD, Lefter L, Trickett PK, Putnam FW. Urinary catecholamine excretion in sexually
abused girls. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. 1994;
33:320–327. [PubMed: 8169176]
141. Pervanidou P, Kolaitis G, Charitaki S, Lazaropoulou C, Hindmarsh P, Bakoula C, Papassotiriou I,
Tsiantis J, Chrousos GP. The natural history of neuroendocrine changes in pediatric
posttraumatic stress disorder after motor vehicle accidents: progressive divergence of
noradrenaline and cortisol concentrations over time. Biological Psychiatry. 2007; 62:1095–1102.
[PubMed: 17624319]
142. Otte C, Neylan TC, Pole N, Metzler T, Best S, Henn-Haase C, Yehuda R, Marmar CR.
Association between childhood trauma and catecholamine response to psychological stress in
police academy recruits. Biol Pyschiatry. 2005; 57(1):27–32.
143. Savitz JB, van derMerwe L, Newman TK, Solms M, Stein DJ, Ramesar RS. The relationship
between childhood abuse and dissociation. Is it influenced by catechol- O-methyltransferase
(COMT) activity? . Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2008; 11:149–161. [PubMed: 17608961]
144. Lesch KP, Mossner R. Genetically driven variation in serotonin update: is there a link to affective
spectrum, neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative disorders? Biological Psychiatry. 1998;
44(3):179–192. [PubMed: 9693390]
145. Siever LJ. Neurobiology of aggression and violence. Am J Psychiatry. 2008; 165(4):429–442.
[PubMed: 18346997]De Bellis and A.B. Page 30
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript

146. Lucki I. The spectrum of behaviors influenced by serotonin. Biological Psychiatry. 1998; 44(3):
151–162. [PubMed: 9693387]
147. Lauder JM. Neurotransmitters as growth regulatory signals: Role of receptors and second
messengers. Trends in Neuroscience. 1993; 16:233–240.
148. Veenema AH. Early life stress, the development of aggression and neuroendocrine and
neurobiological correlates: what can we learn from animal models? Frontiers in
Neuroendocrinology. 2009; 30(4):497–518. [PubMed: 19341763]
149. Ressler KJ, Nemeroff CB. Role of serotonergic and noradrenergic systems in the pathophysiology
of depression and anxiety disorders. Depression and Anxiety. 2000; 12(Suppl. 1):2–19.
[PubMed: 11098410]
150. Goodman M, New A, Siever L. Trauma, genes, and the neurobiology of personality disorders.
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences. 2004; 1032:104–116. [PubMed: 15677398]
151. Lesch KP, Heils A. Serotonergic gene transcriptional control regions: Targets for antidepressant
drug development? . International Journal of Neuropscyhopharmacology. 2000; 3:67–79.
152. Caspi A, Sugden K, Moffitt TE, Taylor A, Craig IW, Harrington H, McClay J, Mill J, Martin J,
Braithwaite A, et al. Influence of life stress on depression: Moderation by a polymorphism in the
5-HTT gene. Science. 2003; 301(5631):386–389. [PubMed: 12869766]
153. Kaufman J, Yang BZ, Douglas-Palumberi H, Houshyar S, Lipschitz D, Krystal JH, Gelernter J.
Social supports and serotonin transporter gene moderate depression in maltreated children.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Science USA. 2004; 101(49):17316–17321.
154. Sugden K, Arseneault L, Harrington H, Moffitt TE, Williams B, Caspi A. Serotonin transporter
gene moderates the development of emotional problems among children following bullying
victimization. The Journal of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry. 2010; 49:830–840.
155. Banny AM, Cicchetti D, Rogosch FA, Oshri A, Crick NR. Vulnerability to depression: A
moderated mediation model of the roles of child maltreatment, peer victimization, and serotonin
transporter linked polymorphic region genetic variation among children from low socioeconomic
status backgrounds. Development & Psychopathology. 2013; 25:599–614. [PubMed: 23880379]
156. Cicchetti D, Rogosch FA. GeneEnvironment interaction and resilience: Effects of child
maltreatment and serotonin, corticotropin releasing hormone, dopamine, and oxytocin genes.
Development & Psychopathology. 2012; 24:411–427. [PubMed: 22559122]
157. Munafo MR, Durrant C, Lewis G, Flint J. Gene Environment interactions at the serotonin
transporter locus. Biological Psychiatry. 2009; 65:211–219. [PubMed: 18691701]
158. Risch N, Herrell R, Lehner T, Liang K, Eaves L, Hob J, Griem A, Kovacs M, Ott J, Merikangas
KR. Interaction between the serotonin transporter gene (5-HTTLPR), stressful life events, and
risk of depression: A meta-analysis. Journal of the American Medical Association. 2009;
301:2462–2471. [PubMed: 19531786]
159. Karg K, Burmeister M, Shedden K, Sen S. The serotonin transporter promoter variant (5-
HTTLPR), stress, and depression meta-analysis revisited: evidence of genetic moderation.
Archives of General Psychiatry. 2011; 68:444–454. [PubMed: 21199959]
160. Sadeh N, Javdani S, Verona E. Analysis of monoaminergic genes, childhood abuse, and
dimensions of psychopathy. Journal of Abnormal Psychology. 2013; 122(1):167–179. [PubMed:
22985017]
161. Shih JC, Chen K, Ridd MJ. Monoamine oxidase: from genes to behavior. Annual Review of
Neuroscience. 1999; 22:197–217.
162. Kim-Cohen J, Caspi A, Taylor A, Williams B, Newcombe R, Craig IW, Moffitt TE. MAOA,
maltreatment, and gene–environment interaction predicting children's mental health: new
evidence and a meta-analysis. Molecular Psychiatry. 2006; 11:903–913. [PubMed: 16801953]
163. Nilsson KW, Sjoberg RL, Wargelius HL, Leppert J, Lindstrom L, Oreland L. The monoamine
oxidase A (MAO-A) gene, family function and maltreatment as predictors of destructive
behaviour during male adolescent alcohol consumption. Addiction. 2007; 102:389–398.
[PubMed: 17298646]
164. Kaufman J, Yang BZ, Douglas-Palumberi H, Crouse-Artus M, Lipschitz D, Krystal JH, Gelernter
J. Genetic and environmental predictors of early alcohol use. Biological Psychiatry. 2007;
61(11):1228–1234. [PubMed: 17123474]De Bellis and A.B. Page 31
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript

165. Ducci F, Enoch MA, Hodgkinson C, Xu K, Catena M, Robin RW, Goldman D. Interaction
between a functional MAOA locus and childhood sexual abuse predicts alcoholism and antisocial
personality disorder in adult women. Molecular Psychiatry. 2008; 13(3):334–347. [PubMed:
17592478]
166. Bartz JA, Zaki J, Bolger N, Ochsner KN. Social effects of oxytocin in humans: context and
person matter. Trends in Cognitive Sciences. 2011; 15(7):301–309. [PubMed: 21696997]
167. Francis DD, Champagne FC, Meaney MJ. Variations in maternal behaviour are associated with
differences in oxytocin receptor levels in the rat. J Neuroendocrinol. 2000; 12(12):1145–1148.
[PubMed: 11106970]
168. Shahrokh DK, Zhang TY, Diorio J, Gratton A, Meaney MJ. Oxytocin dopamine interactions
mediate variations in maternal behavior in the rat. Endocrinology. 2010; 151(5):2276–2286.
[PubMed: 20228171]
169. Bradley B, Davis TA, Wingo AP, Mercer KB, Ressler KJ. Family environment and adult
resilience: contributions of positive parenting and the oxytocin receptor gene. Eur J
Psychotraumatol. 2013; 4
170. Dantzer R, O'Connor JC, Freund GG, Johnson RW, Kelley KW. From inflammation to sickness
and depression: when the immune system subjugates the brain. Nature Reviews Neuroscience.
2008; 9(1):46–56.
171. Mills NT, Scott JG, Wray NR, Cohen-Woods S, Baune BT. Research review: the role of
cytokines in depression in adolescents: a systematic review. Journal of Child Psychology and
Psychiatry. 2013; 54(8):816–835. [PubMed: 24027786]
172. De Bellis MD, Burke L, Trickett PK, Putnam FW. Antinuclear antibodies and thyroid function in
sexually abused girls. Journal of Traumatic Stress. 1996; 9(2):369–378. [PubMed: 8731555]
173. Gill JM, Saligan L, Woods S, Page G. PTSD is associated with an excess of inflammatory
immune activities. Perspectives in Psychiatric Care. 2009; 45(4):262–277. [PubMed: 19780999]
174. Smith AK, Conneely KN, Kilaru V, Mercer KB, Weiss TE, Bradley B, Tang Y, Gillespie CF,
Cubells JF, Ressler KJ. Differential immune system DNA methylation and cytokine regulation in
post-traumatic stress disorder. American Journal of Medical Genetics Part B: Neuropsychiatric
Genetics. 2011; 156B(6):700–708.
175. Lemieux A, Coe CL, Carnes M. Symptom severity predicts degree of T cell activation in adult
women following childhood maltreatment. Brain, Behavior, and Immunity. 2008; 22(6):994–
1003.
176. Altemus M, Cloitre M, Dhabhar FS. Enhanced cellular immune response in women with PTSD
related to childhood abuse. The American Journal of Psychiatry. 2003; 160(9):1705–1707.
[PubMed: 12944352]
177. Carpenter LL, Gawuga CE, Tyrka AR, Lee JK, Anderson GM, Price LH. Association between
Plasma IL-6 Response to Acute Stress and Early-Life Adversity in Healthy Adults.
Neuropsychopharmacology. 2010; 35:2617–2623. [PubMed: 20881945]
178. Danese A, Moffitt TE, Harrington H, Milne BJ, Polanczyk G, Pariante CM, Poulton R, Caspi A.
Adverse Childhood Experiences and Adult Risk Factors for Age-Related Disease:Depression,
Inflammation, and Clustering of Metabolic Risk Markers. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2009;
163(12):1135–1143. [PubMed: 19996051]
179. Pervanidou P, Chrousos GP. Metabolic consequences of stress during childhood and adolescence.
Metabolism. 2012; 61(5):611–619. [PubMed: 22146091]
180. Aber, JL.; Allen, JP.; Carlson, V.; Cicchetti, D. The effects of maltreatment on development
during early childhood: recent studies and their theoretical, clinical, and policy implications, in
Child maltreatment: Theory and research on the causes and consequences of child abuse and
neglect. Carlson, V.; Cicchetti, D., editors. Cambridge University Press; New York: 1989. p.
579-619.
181. Carrey NJ, Butter HJ, Persinger MA, Bialik RJ. Physiological and cognitive correlates of child
abuse. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 1995; 34(8):1067–1075. [PubMed: 7545147]
182. Culp RE, Watkins RV, Lawrence H, Letts D, Kelly DJ, Rice ML. Maltreated children's language
and speech development: abused, neglected, and abused and neglected. First Language. 1991;
11:377–389.De Bellis and A.B. Page 32
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript

183. Eckenrode J, Laird M, Doris J. School performance and disciplinary problems among abused and
neglected children. Developmental Psychology. 1993; 29:53–62.
184. McFadyen RG, Kitson WJH. Language comprehension and expression among adolescents who
have experienced childhood physical abuse. Journal of Child Psychiatry and Psychology. 1996;
37(5):551–562.
185. Trickett PK, McBride-Chang C. The developmental impact of different forms of child abuse &
neglect. Developmental Review. 1995; 15:311–337.
186. Koenen KC, Moffitt TE, Caspi A, Taylor A, Purcell S. Domestic violence is associated with
environmental suppression of IQ in young children. Development and Psychopathology. 2003;
15(2):297–311. [PubMed: 12931829]
187. Beers SR, De Bellis MD. Neuropsychological function in children with maltreatment-related
posttraumatic stress disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry. 2002; 159:483–486. [PubMed:
11870018]
188. DePrince AP, Weinzierl KM, Combs MD. Executive function performance and trauma exposure
in a community sample of children. Child Abuse and Neglect. 2009; 33(6):353–361. [PubMed:
19477515]
189. Fishbein D, Warner T, Krebs C, Trevarthen N, Flannery B, Hammond J. Differential relationships
between personal and community stressors and children's neurocognitive functioning. Child
Maltreatment. 2009; 14(4):299–315. [PubMed: 18971345]
190. Pollak SD, Nelson CA, Schlaak MF, Roeber BJ, Wewerka SS, Wiik KL, Frenn KA, Loman MM,
Gunnar MR. Neurodevelopmental effects of early deprivation in postinstitutionalized children.
Child Development. 2010; 81(1):224–236. [PubMed: 20331664]
191. De Bellis MD, Hooper S, Spratt EG, Woolley DW. Neuropsychological findings in childhood
neglect and their relationships to pediatric PTSD. Journal of the International
Neuropsychological Society. 2009; 15:868–878. [PubMed: 19703321]
192. Samuelson KW, Krueger CE, Burnett C, Wilson DK. Neuropsychological functioning in children
with posttraumatic stress disorder. Child Neuropsychology. 2010; 16(2):119–133. [PubMed:
19787496]
193. De Bellis MD, Woolley DP, Hooper SR. Neuropsychological findings in pediatric maltreatment:
relationship of PTSD, dissociative symptoms, and abuse/neglect indices to neurocognitive
outcomes. Child Maltreat. 2013; 18(3):171–183. [PubMed: 23886642]
194. Jaffee SR, Maikovich-Fong AK. Effects of chronic maltreatment and maltreatment timing on
children's behavior and cognitive abilities. J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 2011; 52(2):184–194.
[PubMed: 20735512]
195. Lansford JE, Dodge KE, Pettit GS, Bates JE, Crozier J, Kaplow J. A 12-year prospective study of
the long-term effects of early child physical maltreatment on psychological, behavioral, and
academic problems in adolescence. Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine. 2002; 156(8):
824–830. [PubMed: 12144375]
196. Mills R, Alati R, O'Callaghan M, Najman JM, Williams GM, Bor W, Strathearn L. Child abuse
and neglect and cognitive function at 14 years of age: findings from a birth cohort. Pediatrics.
2011; 127(1):4–10. [PubMed: 21135010]
197. Noll JG, Shenk CE, Yeh MT, Ji J, Putnam FW, Trickett PK. Receptive language and educational
attainment for sexually abused females. Pediatrics. 2010; 126(3):e615–e622. [PubMed:
20696731]
198. Perez C, Widom CS. Childhood victimization and long-term intellectual and academic outcomes.
Child Abuse & Neglect. 1994; 18(8):617–633. [PubMed: 7953902]
199. Strathearn L, Gray PH, O'Callaghan F, Wood DO. Childhood neglect and cognitive development
in extremely low birth weight infants: a prospective study. Pediatrics. 2001; 108(1):142–151.
[PubMed: 11433067]
200. Trickett PK, McBride-Chang C, Putnam FW. The classroom performance and behavior of
sexually abused girls. Development and Psychopathology. 1994; 6:183–194.
201. Hanson JL, Chung MK, Avants BB, Rudolph KD, Shirtcliff EA, Gee JC, Davidson RJ, Pollak
SD. Structural variations in prefrontal cortex mediate the relationship between early childhood
stress and spatial working memory. J Neurosci. 2012; 32(23):7917–7925. [PubMed: 22674267]De Bellis and A.B. Page 33
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript

202. Bauer PM, Hanson JL, Pierson RK, Davidson RJ, Pollak SD. Cerebellar volume and cognitive
functioning in children who experienced early deprivation. Biological Psychiatry. 2009;
66:1100–1106. [PubMed: 19660739]
203. Carrion VG, Weems CF, Eliez S, Patwardhan A, Brown W, Ray RD, Reiss AL. Attenuation of
frontal asymmetry in pediatric posttraumatic stress disorder. Biological Psychiatry. 2001;
50:943–951. [PubMed: 11750890]
204. De Bellis M, Kuchibhatla M. Cerebellar volumes in pediatric maltreatment-related posttraumatic
stress disorder. Biological Psychiatry. 2006; 60(7):697–703. [PubMed: 16934769]
205. De Bellis MD, Keshavan M, Shifflett H, Iyengar S, Beers SR, Hall J, Moritz G. Brain Structures
in Pediatric Maltreatment-Related Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: A Sociodemographically
Matched Study. Biological Psychiatry. 2002; 52:1066–1078. [PubMed: 12460690]
206. De Bellis MD, Keshavan MS, Frustaci K, Shifflett H, Iyengar S, Beers SR, Hall J. Superior
temporal gyrus volumes in maltreated children and adolescents with PTSD. Biological
Psychiatry. 2002; 51:544–552. [PubMed: 11950456]
207. Hackman D, Farah MJ, Meaney MJ. Socioeconomic status and the brain: mechanistic insights
from human and animal research. Nature Reviews Neuroscience. 2010; 11:651–659.
208. Riva D, Giorgi C. The cerebellum contributes to higher functions during development. Brain.
2000; 123:1051–1061. [PubMed: 10775549]
209. Bellebaum C, Daum I. Cerebellar involvement in executive control. The Cerebellum. 2007;
6:184–192. [PubMed: 17786814]
210. Thoma P, Bellebaum C, Koch B, Schwarz M, Daum I. The Cerebellum Is Involved in Reward-
based Reversal Learning. Cerebellum. 2008; 7:433–443. [PubMed: 18592331]
211. Fransson P. How default is the default mode of brain function? Further evidence from intrinsic
BOLD signal fluctuations. Neuropsychologia. 2006; 44:2836–2845. [PubMed: 16879844]
212. De Bellis MD, Keshavan MS. Sex differences in brain maturation in maltreatment-related
pediatric posttraumatic stress disorder. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2003; 27(1-2):103–117.
[PubMed: 12732227]
213. Conners NA, Bradley RH, Mansell LW, Liu JY, Roberts TJ, Burgdorf K, Herrell JM. Children of
mothers with serious substance abuse problems: An accumulation of risks. American Journal of
Drug and Alcohol Abuse. 2004; 30:85–100. [PubMed: 15083555]
214. Smith DK, Johnson AB, Pears KC, Fisher PA, DeGarmo DS. Child Maltreatment and Foster
Care: Unpacking the Effects of Prenatal and Postnatal Parental Substance Use. Child
Maltreatment. 2007; 12:150. [PubMed: 17446568]
215. Fair DA, Cohen AL, Dosenbach NUF, Church JA, Miezin FM, Barch DM, Raichle ME, Petersen
SE, Schlaggar BL. The maturing architecture of the brain's default network. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences USA. 2008; 105(10):4028–4032.
216. Jackowski AP, Douglas-Palumberi H, Jackowski M, Win L, Schultz RT, Staib LW, Krystal JH,
Kaufman J. Corpus callosum in maltreated children with posttraumatic stress disorder: A
diffusion tensor imaging study. Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging. 2008; 162:256–261.
217. Teicher MH, Dumont NL, Ito Y, Vaituzis C, Giedd JN, Andersen SL. Childhood neglect is
associated with reduced corpus callosum area. Biological Psychiatry. 2004; 56(2):80–85.
[PubMed: 15231439]
218. Prichard, JW. MRS of the brain-prospects for clinical application.. In: Young, IR.; Charles, HC.,
editors. MR Spectroscopy: Clinical Applications and Techniques. The Livery House; London:
1996. p. 1-25.
219. De Bellis MD, Keshavan MS, Spencer S, Hall J. N-acetylaspartate concentration in the anterior
cingulate in maltreated children and adolescents with PTSD. American Journal of Psychiatry.
2000; 157:1175–1177. [PubMed: 10873933]
220. Carrion VG, Weems CF, Richert K, Hoffman BC, Reiss AL. Decreased prefrontal cortical
volume associated with increased bedtime cortisol in traumatized youth. Biological Psychiatry.
2010; 68(5):491–493. [PubMed: 20579974]
221. Carrion VG, Garrett A, Menon V, Weems CF, Reiss AL. Posttraumatic stress symptoms and
brain function during a response-inhibition task: an fMRI study in youth. Depress Anxiety. 2008;
25(6):514–526. [PubMed: 17598145]De Bellis and A.B. Page 34
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript

222. Mueller SC, Maheu FS, Dozier M, Peloso E, Mandell D, Leibenluft E, Ernst M. Early-life stress
is associated with impairment in cognitive control in adolescence: an fMRI study.
Neuropsychologia. 2010; 48(10):3037–3044. [PubMed: 20561537]
223. Smith ME. Bilateral Hippocampal Volume Reduction in Adults With Post-Traumatic Stress
Disorder: A Meta-Analysis of Structural MRI Studies. Hippocampus. 2005; 15:798–807.
[PubMed: 15988763]
224. De Bellis MD, Hall J, Boring AM, Frustaci K, Moritz G. A Pilot Longitudinal Study of
Hippocampal Volumes in Pediatric Maltreatment-Related Posttraumatic Stress Disorder.
Biological Psychiatry. 2001; 50:305–309. [PubMed: 11522266]
225. Carrion VG, Haas BW, Garrett A, Song S, Reiss AL. Reduced hippocampal activity in youth with
posttraumatic stress symptoms: an FMRI study. Journal of Pediatric Psychology. 2010; 35(5):
559–569. [PubMed: 19995868]
226. Carrion VG, Weems CF, Reiss AL. Stress predicts brain changes in children: a pilot longitudinal
study on youth stress, posttraumatic stress disorder, and the hippocampus. Pediatrics. 2007;
119(3):509–516. [PubMed: 17332204]
227. Hanson JL, Chung MK, Avants BB, Shirtcliff EA, Gee JC, Davidson RJ, Pollak SD. Early stress
is associated with alterations in the orbitofrontal cortex: a tensor based morphometry
investigation of brain structure and behavioral risk. Journal of Neuroscience. 2010; 30(22):7466–
7472. [PubMed: 20519521]
228. Choi J, Jeong B, Rohan ML, Polcari A, Teicher MH. Preliminary Evidence for White Matter
Tract Abnormalities in Young Adults Exposed to Parental Verbal Abuse. Biological Psychiatry.
2009; 65:227–234. [PubMed: 18692174]
229. Bremner JD, Narayan M, Staib L, Southwick SM, McGlashan T, Charney DS. Neural correlates
of memories of childhood sexual abuse in women with and without posttraumatic stress disorder.
American Journal of Psychiatry. 1999; 156:1787–1795. [PubMed: 10553744]
230. Bremner JD, Vermetten E, Schmahl C, Vaccarino V, Vythilingam M, Afzal N, Charney DS.
Positron emission tomographic imaging of neural correlates of a fear acquisition and extinction
paradigm in women with childhood sexual-abuse-related post-traumatic stress disorder.
Psychological Medicine. 2005; 35(6):791–806. [PubMed: 15997600]
231. Shin LM, McNally RJ, Kosslyn SM, Thompson WL, Rauch SL, Alpert NM, Pitman RK.
Regional cerebral blood flow during script-imagery in childhood sexual abuse-related PTSD: a
PET investigation. American Journal of Psychiatry. 1999; 156(4):575–584. [PubMed: 10200737]
232. De Bellis MD, Hooper SR. Neural substrates for processing task-irrelevant emotional distracters
in maltreated adolescents with depressive disorders: a pilot study. Journal of Traumatic Stress.
2012; 25(2):198–202. [PubMed: 22522735]
233. Maheu FS, Dozier M, Guyer AE, Mandell D, Peloso E, Poeth K, Ernst M. A preliminary study of
medial temporal lobe function in youths with a history of caregiver deprivation and emotional
neglect. Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci. 2010; 10(1):34–49. [PubMed: 20233954]
234. Tottenham N, Hare TA, Millner A, Gilhooly T, Zevin J, Casey BJ. Elevated amygdala response
to faces following early deprivation. Developmental Science. 2011; 14(2):190–204. [PubMed:
21399712]
235. Hanson JL, Adluru N, Chung MK, Alexander AL, Davidson RJ, Pollak SD. Early neglect is
associated with alterations in white matter integrity and cognitive functioning. Child Dev. 2013;
84(5):1566–1578. [PubMed: 23480812]
236. Anderson CM, Teicher MH, Polcari A, Renshaw PF. Abnormal T2 relaxation time in the
cerebellar vermis of adults sexually abused in childhood: potential role of the vermis in stress-
enhanced risk for drug abuse. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2002; 27:231–244. [PubMed:
11750781]
237. Sheu Y-S, Polcari A, Anderson CM, Teicher MH. Harsh corporal punishment is associated with
increased T2 relaxation time in dopamine-rich regions. NeuroImage. 2010; 53:412–419.
[PubMed: 20600981]
238. Carballedo A, Morris D, Zill P, Fahey C, Reinhold E, Meisenzahl E, Bondy B, Gill M, Möller HJ,
Frodl T. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor Val66Met polymorphism and early life adversity
affect hippocampal volume. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatric Genetics. 2013; 162:183–190.De Bellis and A.B. Page 35
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript

239. Labonté B, Suderman M, Maussion G, Navaro L, Yerko V, Mahar I, Bureau A, Mechawar N,
Szyf M, Meaney MJ, et al. Genome-wide epigenetic regulation by early-life trauma. Archives of
General Psychiatry. 2012; 69(7):722–731. [PubMed: 22752237]
240. Devon RS, Orban PC, Gerrow K, Barbieri MA, Schwab C, Cao LP, Helm JR, Bissada N, Cruz-
Aguado R, Davidson TL, et al. ALS2-deficient mice exhibit disturbances in endosome trafficking
associated with motor behavioral abnormalities. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science
USA. 2006; 103(25):9595–9600.
241. Crozier JC, Wang L, Huettel SA, De Bellis MD. Neural correlates of cognitive and affective
processing in maltreated youth with posttraumatic stress symptoms: Does gender matter?
Development and Psychopathology. 2014; 26:491–513.
242. Pillar G, Malhotra A, Lavie P. Post-traumatic stress disorder and sleep—what a nightmare! Sleep
Medicine Reviews. 2000; 4(2):183–200. [PubMed: 12531165]
243. Harvey AG, Jones C, Schmidt DA. Sleep and posttraumatic stress disorder: a review. Clinical
Psychology Review. 2003; 23:377–407. [PubMed: 12729678]
244. Noll JG, Trickett PK, Susman EJ, Putnam FW. Sleep Disturbances and Childhood Sexual Abuse.
Journal of Pediatric Psychology. 2006; 31(5):469–480. [PubMed: 15958722]
245. Xie L, Kang H, Xu Q, Chen MJ, Liao Y, Thiyagarajan M, O'Donnell J, Christensen DJ,
Nicholson C, Iliff JJ, et al. Sleep Drives Metabolite Clearance from the Adult Brain. Science.
2013; 342:373–377. [PubMed: 24136970]
246. Porto PR, Oliveira L, Mari J, Volchan E, Figueira I, Ventura P. Change the Brain? A Systematic
Review of Neuroimaging in Anxiety Disorders. The Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical
Neurosciences. 2009; 21:114–125. [PubMed: 19622682]
247. McClure EB, Adler A, Monk CS, Cameron J, Smith S, Nelson EE, Leibenluft E, Ernst M, Pine
DS. fMRI predictors of treatment outcome in pediatric anxiety disorders. Psychopharmacology.
2007; 191:97–105. [PubMed: 16972100]
248. DeBellis, MD. Medication Considerations with Maltreated Children. In: Talley, F., editor.
Handbook for the Treatment of Abused and Neglected Children. Haworth Press Inc; Binghamton
NY: 2005. p. 423-472.
249. Donnally, C. Psychopharmacotherapy for Children and Adolescents, in Effective Treatments for
PTSD: Practice Guidelines from the International Society for Traumatic Stress Studies. Foa, EB.,
et al., editors. The Guilford Press; New York NY: 2009. p. 568
250. Pervanidou P. Biology of post-traumatic stress disorder in childhood and adolescence. Journal of
Neuroendocrinology. 2008; 20(5):632–638. [PubMed: 18363804]
251. Green JG, McLaughlin KA, Berglund PA, Gruber MJ, Sampson NA, Zaslavsky AM, Kessler RC.
Childhood adversities and adult psychiatric disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey
Replication, I: Associations with first onset of DSM-IV disorders. Archives of General
Psychiatry. 2010; 67:113–123. [PubMed: 20124111]
252. Mikton, C.; Butchart, A. Child maltreatment prevention: a systematic review of reviews. Vol. 87.
Bulletin of the World Health Organization; 2009. p. 353-361.
253. Kitzman H, Olds DL, Henderson CR Jr, Hanks C, Cole R, Tatelbaum R, McConnochie KM,
Sidora K, Luckey DW, Shaver D, et al. Effect of Prenatal and Infancy Home Visitation by
Nurses on Pregnancy Outcomes, Childhood Injuries, and Repeated Childbearing: A Randomized
Controlled Trial. Journal of the American Medical Association. 1997; 278:644–652. [PubMed:
9272896]
254. Olds DL, Eckenrode J, Henderson CR Jr, Kitzman H, Powers J, Cole R, Sidora K, Morris P,
Pettitt LM, Luckey D. Long-term effects of home visitation on maternal life course and child
abuse and neglect: fifteen-year follow- up of a randomized trial. Journal of the American Medical
Association. 1997; 278(8):637–643. [PubMed: 9272895]
255. Olds DL, Kitzman H, Hanks C, Cole R, Anson E, Sidora-Arcoleo K, Luckey DW, Henderson CR
Jr, Holmberg J, Tutt RA, et al. Effects of Nurse Home Visiting on Maternal and Child
Functioning: Age-9 Follow-up of a Randomized Trial. Pediatrics. 2007; 120:e832. [PubMed:
17908740]De Bellis and A.B. Page 36
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript

256. Kitzman H, Olds DL, Cole R, Hanks CA, Anson EA, Arcoleo KJ, Luckey DW, Knudtson MD,
Henderson CR Jr, Holmberg J. Enduring Effects of Prenatal and Infancy Home Visiting by
Nurses on Children. Archives of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine. 2010; 164(5):412–418.
257. Eckenrode J, Campa M, Luckey DW, Henderson CR Jr, Cole R, Kitzman H, Anson EA, Sidora-
Arcoleo K, Powers J, Olds DL. Long-term Effects of Prenatal and Infancy Nurse Home
Visitation on the Life Course of Youths 19-Year Follow-up of a Randomized Trial. Archives of
Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine. 2010; 164(1):9–15.
258. MacMillan HL, Thomas BH, Jamieson E, Walsh CA, Boyle MH, Shannon HS, Gafni A.
Effectiveness of home visitation by public-health nurses in prevention of the recurrence of child
physical abuse and neglect: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2005; 365:1786–1793.
[PubMed: 15910951]
259. Taussig HN, Clyman RB, Landsverk J. Children Who Return Home From Foster Care: A 6-Year
Prospective Study of Behavioral Health Outcomes in Adolescence. Pediatrics. 2001; 108(1):1–7.
[PubMed: 11433046]
260. Foster ME, Prinz RJ, Sanders MR, Shapiro CJ. The costs of a public health infrastructure for
delivering parenting and family support. Child Youth Serv Rev. 2008; 30:493–501.
261. Cohen, JA.; Mannarino, AP.; Deblinger, E.; Berliner, L. Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy for
Children and Adolescents, in Effective Treatments for PTSD: Practice Guidelines from the
International Society for Traumatic Stress Studies. Foa, EB., et al., editors. The Guilford Press;
New York NY: 2009. p. 223-244.
262. Curtis NM, Ronan KR, Borduin CM. Multisystemic Treatment: A Meta-Analysis of Outcome
Studies. Journal of Family Psychology. 2004; 18(3):411–419. [PubMed: 15382965]
263. Felitti VJ, Anda RF, Nordenberg D, Williamson DF, Spitz AM, Edwards V, Koss MP, Marks JS.
Relationship of childhood abuse and household dysfunction to many of the leading causes if
death in adults. American Journal of Preventive Medicine. 1998; 14:245–258. [PubMed:
9635069]
264. McGloin JM, Widom CS. Resilience among abused and neglected children grown up.
Development and Psychopathology. 2001; 13(4):1021–1038. [PubMed: 11771905]De Bellis and A.B. Page 37
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Key Points
1.Trauma in childhood is a grave psychosocial, medical, and public policy
problem that has serious consequences for its victims and for society.
2.Chronic interpersonal violence in children is common worldwide.
3.Developmental traumatology, the systemic investigation of the psychiatric and
psychobiological effects of chronic overwhelming stress on the developing
child, provides a framework and principles when empirically examining the
neurobiological effects of pediatric trauma.
4.Despite the widespread prevalence of childhood trauma, less is known about
trauma's biological effects in children as compared to adults with child trauma
histories; and even less is known about how these pediatric mechanisms
underlie trauma's short-term and long-term medical and mental health
consequences.De Bellis and A.B. Page 38
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 1.
Developmental Traumatology Model of the Biological Effects of TraumaDe Bellis and A.B. Page 39
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript