Trauma-Focused Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for Traumatized 
Children and Families
Judith A. Cohen, M.D.  and
Department of Psychiatry, Allegheny General Hospital, Drexel University College of Medicine, 4 
Allegheny Center, 8th Floor, Pittsburgh, PA 15212, Jcohen1@wpahs.org
Anthony P. Mannarino, Ph.D.
Department of Psychiatry, Allegheny General Hospital, Drexel University College of Medicine, 4 
Allegheny Center, 8th Floor, Pittsburgh, PA 15212, amannari@wpahs.org
Keywords
Children; adolescents; trauma; PTSD; parents; families; Trauma-Focused CBT; treatment
Overview: Nature of the Problem
Child trauma is a serious societal problem. At least one trauma is reported by two-thirds of 
American children and adolescents (hereafter referred to as “children”); 33% of children 
experience multiple traumas before reaching adulthood1. Although most children are 
resilient, trauma exposure is associated with increased risk for medical and mental health 
problems including Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD), depression, anxiety, substance 
abuse, and attempted and completed suicide2;3. Early identification and treatment of 
traumatized children can prevent these potentially serious and long term negative outcomes.
Parents can have a significant impact on children’s trauma responses. For example, lower 
levels of parental distress about the child’s trauma and greater parental support predict more 
positive outcomes after child trauma exposure whereas greater parental PTSD symptoms 
predicts more negative child outcomes4. Involving parents in the traumatized child’s 
treatment can effectively address these factors and thus positively impact the child’s 
outcome.
Non-offending parents are typically children’s primary source of safety, support, and 
guidance. (It should be noted that TF-CBT does not include offending parents , that is, 
parents who perpetrated the trauma for which the child is receiving treatment such as a 
parent who perpetrated the child’s sexual abuse or domestic violence.) However, trauma 
experiences teach children that the world is dangerous and that adults may not protect them. 
Such children often become angry at and stop trusting their parents, leading parents to 
© 2015 Published by Elsevier Inc.
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . 2015 July ; 24(3): 557–570. doi:10.1016/j.chc.2015.02.005.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

become confused and upset. Trauma-focused therapy can help parents recognize and 
respond appropriately to their children’s trauma responses while setting appropriate 
behavioral limits. This enables parents to provide the traumatized child with ongoing 
opportunities to relearn (or learn for the first time) that people can be safe and trustworthy. 
Thus, there are many reasons to suggest that family-focused treatment that integrally 
includes parents will significantly enhance outcomes for traumatized children.
Child Evaluation Overview
Evaluating children after trauma exposure is complex and is described in detail elsewhere5. 
There are important differences between forensic and clinical evaluations, particularly after 
child abuse6. The following discussion pertains only to clinical evaluations. As with all child 
mental health evaluations, these evaluations should include multiple informants. At a 
minimum this includes interviewing the child and parent, but school reports, pediatric 
records, and/or other information should also be obtained as clinically indicated. This often 
includes speaking to or reviewing records from the child’s Child Protective Services case 
worker; juvenile justice parole officer, and/or past and current psychiatric treatment 
providers (e.g., medication prescriber, in-home or wrap around services, residential 
treatment facility, etc.) If a forensic evaluation has been conducted by the local Child 
Advocacy Center or a private evaluator, these records should also be reviewed and included 
in the evaluation.
To benefit from TF-CBT, children must have experienced at least one remembered trauma . 
The remembered trauma can be any type of trauma, including multiple traumas or complex 
trauma. Since avoidance is a hallmark of PTSD, children often initially minimize 
information about their trauma experiences and symptoms; in some cases they may 
completely deny having experienced trauma, thus contributing to under-diagnosis of trauma-
related disorders. Additionally, as noted above, trauma involves the betrayal of trust, 
typically by adults; meeting a new adult such as a therapist can therefore serve as a trauma 
reminder and lead to high levels of mistrust during the initial evaluation, particularly for 
children with early interpersonal trauma and attachment disruption (“complex trauma”).
Children should have prominent trauma-related symptoms. A PTSD diagnosis is not 
necessary, although some PTSD symptoms are typically present. The use of a validated 
screening instrument such as the UCLA PTSD Reaction Index for DSM-57 or the Children’s 
Posttraumatic Symptom Scale8 may be useful for following these symptoms but is not a 
replacement for a thorough clinical interview. Evaluators must develop competence at 
interviewing children across the developmental spectrum for the range of trauma symptoms 
with which children may present. Other common diagnoses are depressive, anxiety, 
behavioral or adjustment disorders. Therapists should clearly understand the manifestations 
of complex trauma and the multiple domains of trauma impact (i.e., affective, behavioral, 
biological, cognitive, interpersonal, perceptual), rather than depending solely on diagnosis to 
determine appropriateness for trauma-focused treatment. At the same time, therapists must 
distinguish between complex trauma and other comorbidities. For example, children whose 
behavioral problems occur within a constellation of affective, biological, cognitive and 
interpersonal dysregulation that is triggered by trauma reminders will likely respond to TF-Cohen and Mannarino Page 2
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

CBT, and must be differentiated from children with severe primary externalizing behavior 
problems (e.g., Conduct Disorder) who will likely benefit more from another evidence-
based treatment that addresses these difficulties before embarking on trauma-focused 
treatment.
Management Goals
As the above description suggests, the goals of TF-CBT are to address and re-regulate the 
individual child’s domains of trauma impact, which may be summarized by but not limited 
to the following:
A: Affective, e.g., anxiety, sadness, anger, affective dysregulation
B: Behavioral, e.g., avoidance of trauma reminders, self-injurious behaviors, 
maladaptive behaviors modeled during trauma (e.g., sexual behaviors, bullying, 
aggression), non-compliance, severe behavioral dysregulation
B: Biological, e.g., hypervigilance, poor sleep, increased startle, stomachaches, 
headaches, other somatic problems that interfere with functioning
C: Cognitive/perceptual, e.g., intrusive trauma-related thoughts and memories; 
maladaptive trauma-related beliefs, dissociation, psychotic symptoms, cognitive 
dysregulation
S: Social/school: e.g., impaired relationships with family, friends, peers, social 
withdrawal, decline in school concentration, performance and/or attendance; impaired 
attachment and/or trust
Description of Treatment
Core TF-CBT Principles
Core TF-CBT principles are 1) phase- and components-based treatment; 2) component order 
and proportionality of phases; 3) the use of gradual exposure in TF-CBT and 4) the 
importance of integrally including parents or other primary caregivers into TF-CBT 
treatment. The first three are briefly described here. More details about these principles are 
described on our free web-based training site, TF-CBT Web, available at www.musc.edu/
tfcbt and elsewhere9; 10. The remainder of this paper addresses how parents are incorporated 
into TF-CBT treatment.
Trauma-focused CBT is a phase-and components-based treatment as shown in Box 1. The 
three phases of TF-CBT are stabilization, trauma narration and processing, and integration 
and consolidation. The components of TF-CBT are summarized by the acronym 
“PRACTICE”. These components are described in detail below.
Fidelity to the TF-CBT model is important to assure positive outcomes. Fidelity to the TF-
CBT model includes the following: 1) the PRACTICE components are provided in 
sequential order (with some flexibility within the stabilization skills as clinically indicated 
and addressing Enhancing Safety first when clinically appropriate); 2) all PRACTICE 
components are provided (with the exception of In vivo Mastery when this is not clinically Cohen and Mannarino Page 3
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

indicated), and 3) the three TF-CBT phases are provided in appropriate proportion and 
duration. For typical trauma treatment cases, TF-CBT duration is 12–15 sessions and each 
treatment phase receives about an equal number of treatment sessions (i.e., 4–5 sessions/
phase). For complex trauma cases treatment duration is somewhat longer (16–25 sessions) 
and the proportionality is altered slightly with about ½ of treatment (8–12 sessions) 
dedicated to stabilization skills and a quarter of treatment (4–6 sessions) spent on trauma 
narrative and integration/consolidation phases, respectively, as described elsewhere11.
Gradual exposure is included in all of the TF-CBT components. During each session the 
therapist carefully calibrates and includes increasing exposure to trauma reminders while 
encouraging the child and parent to use skills learned in previous sessions in order to master 
the fear, anxiety or other negative emotions evoked upon exposure to these trauma 
memories. Through this process the child and parent learn new cognitions (e.g., “I can talk 
about sexual abuse without crying”; “Maybe my child is not damaged by what happened”). 
With time and ongoing practice, these cognitions become stronger and generalize to other 
situations, gradually replacing the maladaptive ones they initially had about the child’s 
traumatic experience. Current evidence suggests that this may be the underlying process 
through which trauma-related fear is diminished12.
Parental Involvement in TF-CBT
Parent involvement is an integral part of the TF-CBT model and parents receive as much 
time in the treatment as children. During most TF-CBT sessions, the therapist spends about 
30 minutes individually with the child and 30 minutes individually with the parent. Conjoint 
child-parent sessions are included later in the TF-CBT model to optimize open children-
parent communication, both generally and related to the child’s trauma experiences, as 
described in detail below. This structure was selected over family sessions based on the 
rationale that child trauma significantly impacts parents and children and thus both benefit 
from individual opportunities to process personal trauma responses before meeting together 
to do so.
The therapist meets with the parent each session to provide the parent with each PRACTICE 
component as the child is receiving that component. In this manner, the parent is able to help 
the child to practice using the appropriate TF-CBT skills during the week when the child is 
not in therapy. Many parents report that the TF-CBT skills are personally helpful to them, 
and that encouraging their children to use these is helpful in reminding the parent to use the 
skills as well. Often parents practice the skills together with their children at home and this 
encourages the development of family resilience rituals that continue long after the end of 
therapy. Another reason for individual parent sessions is to facilitate open therapist-parent 
communication about difficult topics. For example, some parents may use demeaning 
language to describe the child’s behaviors, use ineffective discipline strategies, or say 
hurtful things to the child about the trauma. In such situation individual parent sessions 
allow the therapist to provide more appropriate parenting skills, as described below.
Most children in foster care have experienced trauma. As described below, including foster 
parents in treatment can enhance engagement and treatment completion for these children. 
In these cases, the therapist can also include the birth parent in TF-CBT if the therapist Cohen and Mannarino Page 4
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

considers this to be clinically appropriate (e.g., if the child is having regular visits with this 
parent and/or reunification is anticipated in the near future). Typically the therapist sees the 
birth parent in individual sessions at a separate time from the child and foster parent, and 
provides the birth parent with the same information as the foster parent. If the visits with the 
birth parent are going well and both foster parent and birth parent desire this, the therapist 
may consider having some sessions that include the birth and foster parents together at some 
points during the treatment, if clinical judgment suggests that this would be beneficial. 
Whether or not the birth parent participates, it is important that whenever possible at least 
one consistent parenting figure participates with the child throughout the course of TF-CBT.
Orienting the Family to TF-CBT
From the beginning of treatment it is important for the therapist to help the family 
understand that TF-CBT is a collaborative child-parent, trauma-focused treatment. The 
therapist may find it useful to review the information from the child’s assessment that led 
the therapist to conclude that trauma-focused treatment was appropriate. Collaborative child-
parent treatment means that the child and parent will both receive about equal time each 
session and that the treatment will include two-way open communication about important 
issues. The parent and child may express discomfort about this (e.g., lack of confidentiality 
in therapy). The therapist can often address this by asking each what their concerns are 
about sharing information and making appropriate adjustments to the extent to which this 
occurs when indicated. For example, youth with complex trauma who are attending TF-CBT 
with new foster parents often have understandable issues with trusting these new caregivers 
or even in trusting the therapist; the therapist needs to attend to this appropriately or the 
therapy may be derailed11.
The therapist also explains what trauma-focused treatment entails in TF-CBT, i.e., that 1) 
the therapist believes that the following problems (the therapist specifies what these are 
here) are related to the child’s trauma experiences; 2) these problems and their relationship 
to the child’s trauma experiences are the focus of this treatment; 3) this is the focus of TF-
CBT and what the treatment will be addressing every session, even if other issues arise 
during the course of treatment. By clarifying the nature of trauma-focused treatment, the 
therapist helps the family to understand what to expect and also differentiates TF-CBT from 
other treatments (e.g., usual care) that they may have received in the past.
We recognize that a variety of caregivers may participate in TF-CBT and in many cases 
these may not be the child’s legal parents and/or may be a single parent or caregiver. For 
consistency and simplicity, the term “parents” is used throughout the following description 
of TF-CBT components except where specifically noted.
STABILIZATION PHASE (4–12 sessions)
Psychoeducation: During psychoeducation the therapist provides information about 
common trauma responses and trauma reminders, and connects these to the child’s trauma 
experiences. The therapist also normalizes and validates these as trauma responses, as many 
children and parents view traumatic behavioral and affective dysregulation as the child 
having become a “bad kid”. Helping children and parents understand these as the child’s Cohen and Mannarino Page 5
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

response to the bad thing(s) that have happened in his or her life, and recognizing trauma 
reminders that may trigger these responses, is often extremely helpful in changing the 
child’s and parent’s perspective on the problem. Importantly, this gives them hope that the 
child can recover and return to more positive functioning. This is true even if the child has a 
long history of complex trauma and long-standing dysregulation. As with all TF-CBT 
components, the therapist individually tailors how to provide psychoeducation, taking into 
consideration the developmental level, culture and interests of the child and family. This 
may include playing interactive psychoeducational games such as the What Do You Know 
game13, or for teens, discussing psychoeducational information such as that available at 
www.nctsn.org .
During psychoeducation for parents, the therapist provides information about the child’s 
trauma experiences and common responses as described above. Important information 
related to the child’s trauma experience may be provided during the psychoeducation 
component, for example, children who have experienced sexual abuse begin to receive 
developmentally appropriate information about sexual abuse including proper names for 
private parts. Some safety information may be incorporated during the psychoeducation 
component (for example, the names of doctor’s names for private body parts and 
information about okay and not okay touches for young children who have experienced 
sexual abuse). However; for children with complex trauma or those at very high risk of 
experiencing ongoing trauma, the Enhancing Safety component may be provided as the 
initial TF-CBT component before psychoeducation as described in detail elsewhere11; 14–15.
Importantly, the therapist helps the parents begin to identify potential trauma reminders . 
Trauma reminders are any cue (e.g., people, places, situations, sights, smells, memories, 
internal sensations, etc.) that remind the child of an earlier trauma; this initiates a cascade of 
psychological, physical and neurobiological responses similar to those the child experienced 
at the time of the original trauma. When parents understand this process, they can make 
more sense of children’s trauma responses and intervene earlier in the process to support the 
child’s use of TF-CBT skills to interrupt, reverse or mitigate the process. For example, a 
child in foster care who had experienced previous domestic violence and physical abuse 
from his father became angry and aggressive when yelled at by an older foster brother, 
leading him to hit younger children in the home. For this child, loud or angry voices were 
trauma reminders of his father (perpetrator), who often screamed before becoming 
physically abusive. The foster mother yelled at this child when he became aggressive to the 
younger children, causing him to become even more dysregulated. Psychoeducation about 
the child’s trauma reminders and responses was the first step in changing this pattern.
Parenting Skills: During the parent skills component, parents gain effective strategies for 
responding to children’s behavioral and emotional dysregulation. The therapist typically 
provides specific instruction, practice, and role plays in parenting skills which the therapist 
clinically determines according to the child’s presentation and the parents’ current 
knowledge and skills. The therapist always encourages parents to use these skills while 
remembering that the child’s behavioral problems occur in the context of trauma reminders. 
More detailed information about implementing these skills is available elsewhere9; 10.Cohen and Mannarino Page 6
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

“Time in” and “time out”: “Time out” involves placing the child in a quiet place that lacks 
child-family interaction or other positive stimulation in order to encourage the child to re-
regulate his or her own emotions and/or behavior. When the larger family context is that the 
child has frequent positive, nurturing and enjoyable interactions with parents (so-called 
“time in”), the child typically finds “time out” to be very negative and wants to return to 
“time in” as soon as possible. Thus, “time out” is most effective when the family provides 
high quality “time in”.
Praise, positive attention, selective attention: In order to create “time in”, therapists instruct 
parents in using praise, positive and selective attention. Elements of effective praise include 
identifying specific behaviors the parents want the child to continue, labeling these for the 
child immediately after they occur and enthusiastically praising these behaviors without 
“taking back” the praise with negative statements or qualifications.
Example of ineffective praise: Mother (several hours after son takes out garbage 
when asked): Thanks for doing your chores. I wish you were always good like that. 
(Errors: did not label the specific desired behavior; did not provide praise 
immediately after the behavior occurred; “took back” the praise with negative 
qualifying statement.)
Example of effective praise: Mother (immediately after son takes out garbage when 
asked): I like how you took out the garbage as soon as I asked you to do it. Thank 
you so much for doing that!
Often parents expect, take for granted, and/or ignore children when they are behaving well, 
and only give attention to negative or problematic behaviors. Since all children crave 
parental attention, this paradigm tends to reinforce children’s negative behaviors –the exact 
opposite of what parents intend. In order to reverse this, positive attention requires parents to 
look for, attend to and promptly provide positive attention (hugs, high fives, verbal praise 
and/or other positive attention) in response to children’s positive behaviors. The therapist 
helps parents to selectively attend to these positive behaviors while paying relatively less 
attention to minor negative behaviors that, while annoying or irritating, are not actually 
dangerous (e.g., pestering or intrusive behaviors, rolling eyes, etc.) By reinforcing desired 
behaviors with high levels of attention and not attending to undesired behaviors, parents 
often see marked improvements in behavioral problems.
For more significant behavioral problems, the therapist helps the parents and child to 
collaboratively develop an individualized contingency reinforcement program. Such 
programs address specific behaviors (e.g., aggression, sleep problems, sexually 
inappropriate behaviors), and provide specific contingencies (rewards such as stars; 
punishments such as loss of access to electronics) if the child does or does not meet the 
expectations for the number of times the behavior occurs within a given time period 
(typically one day or part of a day). Critical to the success of these programs are to 1) 
include the child and parents in developing the program and prizes associated with rewards; 
2) chose only one behavior to address at a time rather than attempting to resolve multiple 
behaviors simultaneously; 3) have parents provide praise for any successes and provide 
contingencies and rewards promptly and consistently.Cohen and Mannarino Page 7
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Relaxation Skills: As noted above, traumatized children experience multiple 
neurobiological changes that tend to maintain trauma responses. Parents may experience 
their own personal biological hyperarousal responses. Relaxation skills can help children 
and parents to re-regulate these stress systems, both in resting states and in response to 
trauma reminders. The therapist provides personalized relaxation strategies to the child and 
encourages them to practice these on a regular basis at home. These may include focused 
(yoga) breathing, progressive muscle relaxation and visualization, skills that have been 
demonstrated to produce physiologic relaxation responses; but therapists may also 
encourage children to use a variety of other relaxation strategies based on the child’s own 
interests and developmental level. For example, younger children often like to relax through 
blowing bubbles, dance (e.g., “Hokey Pokey”, Chicken Song) and song (“Row, Row, Row 
Your Boat”); while teens often prefer to relax using their favorite music, physical activities 
or crafts such as crochet or knitting. Other children find reading or prayer relaxing. It is 
important for children to develop a variety of different relaxation strategies since a particular 
strategy (e.g., exercise) may be effective in some settings (e.g., after school or with peers) 
but not in others (e.g., when going to sleep at night).
After the child has identified and practiced several acceptable relaxation strategies, the 
therapist meets with the parents and teaches them the relaxation skills preferred by the child. 
The therapist helps the parents to recognize situations in which the child may be 
experiencing physiological arousal in response to trauma reminders and encourages the 
parents to support the child in using the relaxation skills in these situations. Parents often 
find relaxation skills to help with their personal anxiety or hyperarousal responses and the 
therapist may encourage parents to use relaxation in this regard as well. As noted above, 
younger children may enjoy demonstrating the newly practiced relaxation skills directly to 
the parents in a brief joint meeting with the parents at the end of this session.
Affect Modulation Skills: During trauma experiences many children learn to not express, 
develop distance from, or even deny negative feelings as a self-protective mechanism. 
During this component the therapist helps children to become comfortable with expressing a 
variety of different feelings and to develop skills for managing negative affective states. 
These may include strategies such as problem solving, seeking social support, positive 
distraction techniques (e.g., humor, journaling, helping others, perspective taking, reading, 
taking a walk, playing with a pet, etc.), focusing on the present, and a variety of anger 
management techniques. The therapist encourages the child to develop a “tool kit” of these 
skills that work in different settings and for different negative feelings9. These skills are 
familiar to most child therapists; however, in contrast to other child treatments, in TF-CBT 
the therapist encourages the child to implement the affective modulation skills in response to 
trauma reminders.
After identifying the child’s preferred affective modulation strategies, the therapist then 
educates, practices, and role plays with the parents about how they can support the child in 
implementing these skills. This often requires substantial parental tolerance and forbearance. 
Helping parents to tolerate children’s verbal expressions of negative emotions as a positive 
step toward improved affective regulation is often challenging for the therapist and parents, 
especially when the parents’ cultural perspective views verbalizations of negative emotions Cohen and Mannarino Page 8
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

(e.g., using cuss words; “I hate you”) as disrespectful. Some parents have limited tolerance 
for their child’s demands for parental support, especially when these come at inconvenient 
times or are viewed as “whining” or “manipulative”. The therapist may address this by 
having the parents keep a chart of the child’s negative behaviors and requests for support; 
often such parents find that negative behaviors occur soon after the child unsuccessfully asks 
for support; and that if/when the parents begin to respond more consistently to the child’s 
requests for support, the problematic behaviors begin to decrease.
Cognitive Processing Skills: During this component the therapist helps children recognize 
connections among thoughts, feelings and behaviors (the “cognitive triangle”) and replace 
maladaptive cognitions (inaccurate or unhelpful thoughts) related to everyday events with 
more accurate or helpful cognitions. At this point in TF-CBT the therapist is not focusing on 
trauma-related thoughts with the child, since it is more effective to process these during the 
trauma narrative component. The therapist may use a variety of techniques to assist children 
with cognitive processing, including progressive logical (Socratic) questioning, 
responsibility pie, and best friend role play9; 10.
The therapist meets with the parent to introduce the cognitive triangle and to begin 
processing the parents’ maladaptive cognitions. Initially the therapist identifies parents’ 
maladaptive cognitions related to everyday events and helps the parents use cognitive 
processing in this regard Many parents have maladaptive cognitions related to the child’s 
trauma (e.g., “I should have protected my child”; “I should have known sooner that this was 
happening to my child”; “My child is forever damaged because of what happened”). The 
therapist uses clinical judgment to decide whether to begin processing the parents’ trauma-
related maladaptive cognitions (i.e., before or during the child’s trauma narrative). Cognitive 
processing techniques are described in a free web-based training site, CPTWeb, available at 
www.musc.edu/cpt .
TRAUMA NARRATIVE AND PROCESSING PHASE (2–6 sessions)
Trauma Narrative and Processing\: During the trauma narrative and processing phase, the 
therapist and child engage in an interactive process during which the child describes 
increasingly difficult details about personal trauma experiences, including thoughts, 
feelings, and body sensations that occurred during these traumas. Through this process the 
child speaks about even the most horrific and feared traumatic memories, thus “speaking the 
unspeakable” which enables the child to learn a mastery rather than avoidance response to 
these memories. Through the process of retelling the story as it is being developed further, 
the child has multiple opportunities for repeated practice of learning this mastery over 
traumatic memories; this also enables the child to gain perspective about the trauma 
experiences and thereby to identify potential errors in beliefs that the child previously 
assumed to be “set in stone” (maladaptive cognitions, e.g., “I deserved to be abused”, etc.). 
Through the cognitive processing strategies learned previously the therapist helps the child 
to process trauma-related maladaptive cognitions. The child develops a written summary of 
the trauma narrative process, usually in the form of a book, poem or song. However, it is 
critical to emphasize that this written document is only a small fraction of the actual trauma 
narrative, which is an interactive process that occurs between the child and therapist, Cohen and Mannarino Page 9
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

typically over the course of several sessions. The written narrative often is organized into 
chapters (e.g., “About me”; “How it all began”’ “Sexual Abuse through the years” 
“Domestic violence sucks”’ Death” “Escape” “How I’ve changed”). Children who have 
experienced complex trauma often develop a life narrative rather than a chapter narrative, 
organized around a central trauma “theme”11. However, like other TF-CBT trauma 
narratives, these also describe specific trauma episodes in detail.
As the child meets with the therapist weekly to develop the narrative, the therapist meets in 
parallel sessions with the parents to share the content of the child’s narrative. This serves 
multiple purposes. Few parents have heard all of the details about the child’s trauma 
experiences, and this process allows the parents to understand the child’s trauma experiences 
more fully. (Even when the parent co-experienced the trauma, such as a mother who was the 
direct victim of domestic violence that the child witnessed, it is common for these 
perspectives to differ considerably and a primary goal of the TF-CBT process is for non-
offending parents to hear and support the child’s personal perspective). Another goal is to 
help parents to identify and process their personal trauma-related maladaptive cognitions; 
for example, hearing the child’s trauma narrative may cause parents to question why their 
child did not tell them about the abuse sooner, and this provides an opportunity for the 
parents to thoroughly process this maladaptive cognition. Finally, hearing the child’s trauma 
narrative in separate sessions with the therapist as the child is developing the narrative 
provides the parents with adequate time to prepare emotionally and cognitively for the 
conjoint child-parent sessions, during which the child typically shares the narrative directly 
with the parents. Through repeated exposure to the child’s narrative the parents, like the 
child, gain new mastery related to hearing about their child’s trauma experiences, and thus 
more ability to model adaptive coping in the child’s presence during the conjoint sessions.
INTEGRATION AND CONSOLIDATION PHASE (2–8 sessions)
In vivo Mastery: In vivo mastery is the only optional TF-CBT component. Some children 
develop ongoing fears and avoidance of situations that are inherently innocuous . When this 
avoidance significantly interferes with children’s adaptive functioning, it becomes an 
important issue to address in treatment; the TF-CBT therapist uses clinical judgment to 
determine which children require this component. For example, a child who was sexually 
abused in her bedroom by a perpetrator who is no longer in the home was still be afraid to 
sleep in her own bed, and eventually afraid to sleep at night at all, and was disrupting other 
family members’ sleep. Another child who witnessed his sibling’s sudden death at home 
avoided attend school for fear that his mother or another younger sibling would also die 
when he wasn’t home. In vivo mastery would be appropriate for these children. In 
distinction to the trauma narrative, which involves imaginal exposure to children’s trauma 
experiences, “in vivo” (“in real life”) mastery involves exposure to the actual innocuous 
situation (e.g., sleeping in one’s own bed; returning to school, etc.) that the child fears and 
avoids. Through gradually facing the feared situation and learning that the feared outcome 
does not happen, the child learns mastery rather than avoidance.
In order to implement in vivo mastery, the therapist, child and parents develop a fear 
hierarchy (sometimes referred to as a fear ladder), ascending from the least feared (“1”) to Cohen and Mannarino Page 10
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

most feared (“10”) scenarios, with 10 being the desired end point, e.g., the child sleeping in 
her own bed or attending full days of school. In vivo mastery involves gradually building up 
to or mastering the end point through mastering a series of smaller steps.. Since in vivo 
mastery typically takes several weeks to complete and also because the child’s adaptive 
functioning is significantly impacted, the therapist usually begins in vivo mastery during the 
TF-CBT stabilization skills phase. Since relaxation and other TF-CBT stabilization skills are 
needed to help the child (and often the parent) to tolerate the intermediate steps in the fear 
hierarchy, the therapist often provides psychoeducation, parenting skills and relaxation skills 
prior to initiating the in vivo mastery plan.
The parents are critical to the success of in vivo mastery. Children are often reluctant to 
surrender the fears that they believe are keeping bad things from happening and parents 
provide confidence and reassurance that helps the child to get through the difficult early 
stages of the mastery process. Parents and (if applicable) school personnel must understand 
why in vivo mastery is important to the child’s improved adaptive functioning and must 
“buy in” to the plan for it to be successful. The therapist must address the parents’ concerns 
or fears about the child gaining mastery over the feared situation, as well as any potential 
secondary gain that parents may derive from the child continuing the avoidant behavior. The 
therapist also encourages the parents to use ongoing praise, patience and persistence in 
encouraging the child to use relaxation and other TF-CBT skills during the in vivo mastery 
plan. These increasingly reap rewards for the child and parents as the child gains increasing 
pride in mastering previously feared situations. If the parents do not carry out the in vivo 
plan consistently, the child’s fear and avoidance often get even worse, due to the power of 
intermittent reinforcement. The therapist should not embark on an in vivo plan unless the 
parents are fully invested in seeing the plan through to completion.
Conjoint Child-Parent Sessions: The therapist provides several conjoint child-parent 
sessions during the integration and consolidation phase. This provides opportunities for 
modeling and optimizing direct communication among family members about the child’s 
traumatic experiences and other important topics before treatment closure. During conjoint 
sessions the therapist typically meets briefly with the parents alone (5–10 minutes) and the 
child alone (5–10 minutes) to prepare each for the rest of the session (conjoint child-parent 
session, 40–50 minutes).
The first conjoint session is usually devoted to the child sharing the trauma narrative. If this 
occurs, the parents have already heard and cognitively processed the child’s narrative during 
their individual parent sessions with the therapist (described above under Trauma Narrative). 
In addition to the child sharing the narrative itself, the child and parents may ask each other 
several questions that they prepared during their respective preparation time. For example, 
one child asked his parents “How were you feeling when I disclosed the sexual abuse”; a 
parent asked her son, “Did you ever blame me for your sister’s death?” These questions 
often facilitate open discussion of deeper feelings and cognitions related to the child’s 
trauma experiences and many families report that these sessions were the most valuable part 
of their TF-CBT treatment.Cohen and Mannarino Page 11
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Subsequent conjoint child-parent session may address healthy sexuality, bullying 
prevention, substance use refusal skills, making good peer or dating decision, enhancing 
family communication, enhancing safety, or other topics according to the therapist’s clinical 
judgment. For children who have experienced sexual abuse it is particularly important for 
therapists to address healthy sexuality and parents often prefer to be included in this process. 
Whatever the topic the therapist selects, it is helpful to make the process fun and interactive 
rather than didactic. For example, most children enjoy competing with their parents in quiz 
or other games in which they can display their increasing knowledge and understanding 
about trauma and its impact. During the conjoint sessions the therapist may reintroduce 
What Do You Know or other therapeutic games used earlier in TF-CBT to use in this regard.
Enhancing Safety: Since traumatic experiences involve the loss of safety and betrayal of 
trust, it is important for children and parents to acknowledge this openly during treatment 
and to develop practical strategies for enhancing children’s actual safety as well as 
emotional and interactive means for enhancing the child’s internal sense of security and 
trust. In cases where there is ongoing risk of trauma exposure, the safety component is 
addressed at the beginning and often throughout TF-CBT11; 14–15. Whether or not there is 
risk of repeated trauma exposure, it is usually helpful to develop a systematic family safety 
plan that applies to all family members that might include “no violence”, “no substance 
abuse”, “no secrets” (i.e., everyone tells and no one keeps secrets related to breaking the 
family safety rules), and other mutually agreed upon rules that help all family members to 
feel safe within the home. Communicating these to all family members and practicing their 
implementation at home enhances the child’s belief that everyone in the family will adhere 
to the safety plan going forward.
Evaluation of Outcome
Trauma-focused CBT has been evaluated in 15 randomized controlled trials (RCT) in which 
it was compared to other active treatments/usual community care (in clinical settings) or 
wait list control conditions (in refugee or war conditions). Among the currently evidence-
based child trauma treatments, TF-CBT alone has been evaluated across the child and 
adolescent developmental spectrum (3–18 years), for multiple index trauma types (e.g., 
sexual abuse, commercial sexual exploitation, domestic violence, disaster, war, traumatic 
grief, multiple and complex trauma), in different settings (e.g., clinic, foster care, 
community domestic violence center, refugee NGO, HIV treatment centers) and in multiple 
countries and cultures (e.g., US, Africa, Europe, Australia) and with both mental health and 
non-mental health providers. In all of these studies TF-CBT has been found to be superior to 
the comparison conditions for improving PTSD symptoms/diagnosis, as well as other related 
mental health difficulties such as depressive, anxiety, behavioral, cognitive, relationship and 
other problems.
In many of these studies the impact of including parents in treatment has been examined. 
One study compared TF-CBT provided to child only, parent only, or child + parent, to usual 
community treatment16. The TF-CBT conditions that included the parent led to significantly 
greater improvement in positive parenting practices as well as in the child’s behavioral 
problems and child-reported depressive problems. A study of preschoolers who had Cohen and Mannarino Page 12
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

experienced sexual abuse documented that TF-CBT led to greater improvement in child 
outcomes as well as in parental support and parental emotional distress than nondirective 
supportive therapy. Improvement in parental support significantly mediated improvement in 
children’s PTSD symptoms at post-treatment and improvement in parental support and 
emotional distress significantly mediated improvement in children’s behavioral problems at 
6- and 12-month follow-ups. A study of children ages 8–14 years who experienced sexual 
abuse showed that TF-CBT led to significantly greater improvement in parental support and 
this improvement significantly mediated improvement in children’s depressive and anxiety 
symptoms19. Recent research has shown that including foster parents in TF-CBT enhanced 
the foster parent’s engagement in treatment and the family’s retention in treatment20; 21. A 
recent community treatment study in Norway study comparing TF-CBT to usual care found 
that in addition to children in the TF-CBT group experiencing significantly greater 
improvement in PTSD, general mental health symptoms and functional impairment22, 
parents in the TF-CBT condition experienced significantly greater improvement in their 
personal depressive symptoms and this mediated significantly greater improvement in 
children’s depressive symptoms in the TF-CBT condition only23.
Conclusion/Summary
Trauma-focused CBT is a family-based treatment for traumatized children with strong 
empirical support for improving PTSD, depressive, anxiety, behavioral, cognitive, 
relationship and other problems. Parents or caregivers participate in all components of TF-
CBT during initial parallel individual parent sessions and later conjoint parent-child 
sessions. Several studies document that parental inclusion significantly contributes to 
positive child outcomes.
Acknowledgments
Disclosures:  Drs. Cohen and Mannarino receive grant funding from NIMH and SAMHSA and book royalties from 
Guilford Press.
Acronyms
TF-CBT Trauma-focused cognitive behavioral therapy
PTSD Posttraumatic Stress Disorder
RCT randomized controlled trials
References
1. Copeland W, Keeler G, Angold A, Costello EJ. Traumatic Events and post-traumatic stress in 
childhood. Arch General Psychiatry. 2007; 64:577–584.
2. Felitti VJ, et al. Relationship of childhood abuse and household dysfunction to many of the leading 
causes of death in adults. The Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACE) Study. Am J Prev Med. 1998; 
14(4):245–258. [PubMed: 9635069] 
3. Kilpatrick D, et al. Violence and risk of PTSD, major depression, substance abuse/dependance and 
comorbidity: results for the National Survey of Adolescents. J Clinical Child Psychology. 2003; 
71:692–700.Cohen and Mannarino Page 13
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

4. Pine DC, Cohen JA. Trauma in children: risk and treatment of psychiatric sequelae. Biological 
Psychiatry. 2002; 51:519–531. [PubMed: 11950454] 
5. Kisiel C, Conradi L, Gehernbach T, Torgersen E, Briggs EC. Assessing the effects of trauma in 
children and adolescents in practice settings. Child Adolesc Clinics N Amer. 2014; 23:223–242.
6. Mannarino AP, Cohen JA. Treating sexually abused children and their famlies: identifying and 
avoiding professional role conflices. Trauma, Violence & Abuse. 2001; 2:331–342.
7. Steinberg AM, Brymer MJ, Decker K, Pynoos RS. The University of California at Los Angeles 
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Reaction Index. Current Psychiatry Reports. 2004; 6:96–100. 
[PubMed: 15038911] 
8. Foa EB, Treadwell K, Johnson K, Feeny NC. The Child PTSD Symptom Scale: a preliminary 
examination of its psychometric properties. J Clin Child Psychology. 2001; 30:376–384.
9. Cohen, JA.; Mannarino, AP.; Deblinger, E. Treating trauma and traumatic grief in children and 
adolescents. New York: Guilford Press; 2006. 
10. Cohen, JA.; Mannarino, AP.; Deblinger, E., editors. Trauma-focused CBT for children and 
adolescents: Treatment applications. New York: Guilford Press; 2012. 
11. Cohen JA, Mannarino AP, Kleithermes M, Murray LA. Trauma-focused cognitive behavioral 
therapy for youth with complex trauma. Child Abuse Neglect. 2012; 36:528–541. [PubMed: 
22749612] 
12. Craske MG, Kircanshi K, Zelikowski M, Mystkowski J, Chowdhury N, Baker A. Optimizing 
inhibitory learning during exposure therapy. Behaviour Research & Therapy. 2008; 46:5–27. 
[PubMed: 18005936] 
13. CARES Institute. What do you know?. Stratford, NJ: Rowan University; 2006. 
14. Cohen JA, Mannarino AP, Murray LK. Trauma-focused CBT for youth who experience ongoing 
traumas. Child Abuse & Neglect. 2011; 35:637–646. [PubMed: 21855140] 
15. Murray LK, Cohen JA, Mannarino AP. Trauma-focused CBT for youth who experience 
continuous traumatic stress. Peace & Conflict: J Peace Psychology. 2013; 19:180–195.
16. Deblinger E, Lippmann J, Steer RA. Sexually abused children suffering posttrauamtic stress 
symptoms: initial treatment outcome findings. Child Maltreatment. 1996; 1:310–321.
17. Cohen JA, Mannarino AP. A treatment outcome study for sexually abused preschool children: 
Initial findings. J American Acad Child Adolescent Psychiatry. 1996; 35:42–50.
18. Cohen JA, Mannarino AP. Factors that mediate treatment oucome of sexually abused preschoolers: 
Six and twelve month follow-ups. J American Acad Child Adolescent Psychiatry. 1998; 37:44–51.
19. Cohen JA, Mannarino AP. Predictors of treatment outcome in sexually abused children. Child 
Abuse & Neglect. 2000; 24:983–994. [PubMed: 10905421] 
20. Dorsey S, Pullmann MD, Berliner L, Koschmann E, McKay M, Deblinger E. Engaging foster 
parents in treatment: A randomized trial of supplementing Trauma-focused Cognitive Behavioral 
Therapy with evidence-based engagement strateiges. Child Abuse & Neglect. 2014; 38:1508–
1520. [PubMed: 24791605] 
21. Dorsey S, Conover K, Cox JR. Improving foster parent engagement: Using qualitative methods to 
guide tailoring of evidence-based engagement strategies. J Clinical Child Adolescent Psychology. 
(in press). 
22. Jensen TK, Holt T, Ormhaug SM, Egeland K, Granly L, Hoaas LC, Hukkelberg SS, Indregard T, 
Stormyren SD, Wentzel-Larsen T. A randomized effectiveness study comparing Trauma-Focused 
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy with therapy as usual for youth. J Clinical Child Adolescent 
Psychology. 2013; 43:356–369.
23. Holt T, Jensen TK, Wentzel-Larsen T. The change and the mediating role of parental emotional 
reactions and depression in the treatment of traumatized youth: results from a randomized 
controlled study. Child & Adolescent Psychiatry Mental Health. 2014; 8:11.Cohen and Mannarino Page 14
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Key Points
•Trauma-focused cognitive behavioral therapy (TF-CBT) is a family-focused 
treatment in which parents or caregivers (hereafter referred to as “parents”) 
participate equally with their traumatized child or adolescent (hereafter referred 
to as “child”).
•TF-CBT is a components- and phase-based treatment that emphasizes 
proportionality and incorporates gradual exposure into each component.
•Parents and child receive all TF-CBT components in parallel individual sessions 
which allow parents and child to express their personal thoughts and feelings 
about the child’s trauma experiences, gain skills to help the child re-regulate 
trauma responses and master avoidance of trauma reminders and memories.
•Families also participate in several conjoint parent-child sessions to enhance 
family communication about the child’s trauma experiences and parental 
support of the child
•Research documents that parental participation significantly enhances the 
beneficial impact of TF-CBT for traumatized children.Cohen and Mannarino Page 15
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Box 1: TF-CBT Components and Phases
Psychoeducation
Parenting Skills
Relaxation STABILIZATION PHASE
Affect Modulation
Cognitive Processing
Trauma Narration & Processing TRAUMA NARRATIVE PHASE
In vivo Mastery
Conjoint Child-Parent Sessions INTEGRATION/CONSOLIDATION PHASE
Enhancing Safety
(Traumatic Grief Components-Optional)Cohen and Mannarino Page 16
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript