See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/232444458



Trauma, Dissociation, and Disorganized Attachment: Three Strands of a Single
Braid.

Article in Psychotherapy Theory Research Practice Training · December 2004
DOI: 10.1037/0033-3204.41.4.472




CITATIONS                                                                                              READS

433                                                                                                    18,151


1 author:

             Giovanni Liotti
             Associazione di Psicologia Cogntiva Roma
             95 PUBLICATIONS 3,065 CITATIONS

                SEE PROFILE




Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:



              The Evolutionary Study of Motivation: A Multi-motivational Theory View project




 All content following this page was uploaded by Giovanni Liotti on 16 May 2014.

 The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.
        (Published in: Psychotherapy: Theory, research, practice, training Vol. 41, pp. 472-486, 2004)




           Trauma, Dissociation, and Disorganized

       Attachment: Three Strands of a Single Braid



                                        Giovanni Liotti, M.D.1




                                        Running head: Trauma, dissociation and attachment




Key words: Attachment, Disorganization, Dissociation, Trauma, Vulnerability, PTSD, Psychotherapy.




1
 Professor of Cognitive Psychotherapy
Scuola di Psicoterapia Cognitiva
Viale Castro Pretorio 116
00185 Roma (Italy)



                                                                                                         1
       The aim of this paper is to familiarize the reader with research findings and theoretical

perspectives that suggest that disorganized attachment plays a central role in trauma-related

disorders. It is proposed that the propensity to react to traumatic events with dissociation is related

to disorganization of early attachment and its developmental sequelae. This conceptual framework

has deep implications for the psychotherapeutic treatment of dissociative disorders, a topic that will

be briefly addressed in the final section of this paper.



An overview of research on attachment in infants and adults

       Early attachment is studied and assessed through a standardized laboratory procedure (the

Strange Situation: Ainsworth, 1982) where infants about 18 months old are observed during two

brief episodes of separation from a caregiver, followed by two episodes of reunion. Three patterns

of organized attachment behavior have been identified in infants: secure (the infant cries at

separation and is quickly comforted at reunion), insecure-avoidant (the infant does not cry at

separation, and actively avoids the caregiver on reunion) and insecure-ambivalent (the infant cries

at separation, but is not easily comforted on reunion). Some infants are not able to organize their

attachment behavior according to any unitary or coherent pattern: they are classified disorganized in

their attachments.

       Research studies on adult attachment are based on the Adult Attachment Interview (AAI: see

Hesse, 1999). The AAI is a standardized interview, developed by Mary Main and her collaborators,

that explores adult individuals’ autobiographical memories of past attachment relationships. A

complex scoring system of the interview transcript allows for a reliable classification of the

individual’s state of mind concerning attachment relationships. Classification is based on the

assessment of (1) deficits in metacognitive monitoring expressed as incoherence of memory,

thought and discourse, and (2) different ways of organizing coherent states of mind concerning

attachment.



                                                                                                          2
       The three main classes of coherent states of mind emerging from the AAI are called

“autonomous” (related to secure attachment in children), “dismissing” (linked to insecure-avoidant

attachment in children) and “preoccupied” (related to early insecure-ambivalent attachment).

“Autonomous” interviews show coherent narratives, high levels of metacognitive monitoring

(ongoing awareness that one’s report of past memories should be made understandable to the

interviewer) and freedom of thought in reporting memories of early attachment (i.e., both positive

and emotionally negative memories are reported in a non-defensive manner). “Dismissing”

interviews are characterized by idealization of the attachment figures, dismissing attitudes toward

the importance of attachment needs, and a discrepancy between semantic (i.e., global descriptive)

and episodic (i.e., specific) childhood memories. This discrepancy takes the form of maintaining an

idealized view of one’s parents despite recollections that suggest a childhood marked by

unhappiness and an unsatisfactory relationship with one’s parents. Finally, interviews showing

continuing preoccupation with the meaning and value of one’s early attachment experiences are

rated “Preoccupied”.

       High levels of incoherence (e.g., lapses and discrepancies between feeling and thinking

while reporting memories of past attachment relationships) and very poor metacognitive monitoring

of discourse lead to an AAI classification called “unresolved”. Unresolved interviews are

characterized by episodic memories of attachment-related traumas or losses that are not well

integrated in the semantic structures of self-knowledge. A major discovery in attachment research is

the strong relationship between caregivers’ unresolved memories of traumas or losses, leading to

“unresolved” AAI classification, and disorganization of early attachment in their children (Main &

Hesse, 1990; Main & Solomon, 1990). About 80% of children whose parents are rated “unresolved”

at the AAI develop disorganized attachment to their parents (see Lyons-Ruth and Jacobvitz, 1999,

and Hesse et al., 2003, for reviews of the research findings supporting this statement).

        This discovery is of great interest for clinicians, insofar as it alerts to the likelihood that

patients who suffer from trauma-related disorders may establish a problematic relationship,

                                                                                                          3
mediated by attachment disorganization, with their children. The implications of these research

findings for understanding the interpersonal dimension of trauma-related disorders are, however,

even more interesting, and deserve the detailed analysis that will occupy the subsequent sections of

this paper.



Similarities between dissociation, unresolved AAI responses, and disorganized attachment

       Both AAI transcripts that are classified “unresolved as to traumas” and infant disorganized

attachment behavior bear close resemblance to clinical phenomena usually regarded as indicative of

dissociation (Hesse & Main, 2000; Main & Morgan, 1996).

       Dissociation is usually defined as a deficit of the integrative functions of memory,

consciousness and identity, and is often related to traumatic experiences and traumatic memories.

During clinical interviews, dissociation is suggested either by such a degree of unwitting absorption

in mental states that ordinary attention to the outside environment is seriously hampered, or by a

sudden lack of continuity in discourse, thought or behavior of which the person is unaware

(supposedly due to intrusion of dissociated mental contents in the flow of consciousness). Thus, for

instance, a dissociative patient may suddenly interrupt her speech during a therapeutic session, stare

into the void for minutes, and become unresponsive to the therapist’s queries as to what is

happening to her. Or a patient suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) may suddenly

utter fragmented and incoherent comments on intrusive mental images (usually related to traumatic

memories) that surface in his consciousness and hamper the continuity of the preceding dialogue

with the therapist. In the most extreme variety of dissociation (Dissociative Identity Disorder, DID),

an alternate ego state may appear during the clinical dialogue, reporting (sometimes with an

unusual, e.g. childlike, tone of voice) memories of childhood abuse of which the patient has

previously been totally unaware, or expressing attitudes and beliefs quite extraneous to the patients’

personality.



                                                                                                     4
       Structurally similar phenomena may appear during an AAI, collected within a non-clinical

sample, that is rated “unresolved”. For instance, an adult individual may “fall silent in the middle of

a sentence discussing loss or trauma, and then complete the sentence 20 seconds or more later, as if

no time had passed” (Main & Morgan, 1996, p. 125). Others may “seem to suffer an intrusion of

visual-sensory images which interfere with correct speech” as in a case where this sentence, related

with a childhood experience involving the father, was uttered: “Yes, well what he did was hit me,

stick, stick, hurts … brown stick” (Main & Morgan, 1996, p. 126, italics added). Still others may

show the sudden, inappropriate intrusion into the interview of information regarding a traumatic

experience suffered at the hand of the attachment figure, (sometimes with a change into a childlike

speech form).

       Infants whose attachment behavior in the Strange Situation is rated “disorganized” also

show behaviors that are, on the phenotypic level, similar to those indicative of dissociation in adult

patients. For instance, in the middle of an approach behavior to the parent, they may suddenly

become immobile, unresponsive to the parent’s call, with a blind look, and persist in this state for

30 seconds or more. They may also show contradiction in movement patterns, as if they are

pursuing two incompatible goals simultaneously or in quick succession. An aggressive gesture,

executed whit an unusual facial expression, without warning and in the middle of a display of

affectionate behavior toward the caregiver, is another possible indicator of dissociation in

disorganized infants: A number of them have been observed, while they were pleasantly interacting

with the parent in the Strange Situation, suddenly “…assuming a dazed or trancelike expression,

reaching slowly to strike at the parent’s face or eyes, and then resuming affectionate behavior…”

(Main & Morgan, 1996, p. 125). Many other instances of disorganized attachment behavior that

may be indicative of dissociative processes have been described by Main and Morgan (1996). Since

disorganized attachment in children is strongly linked to unresolved AAI ratings in their parents,

these observations hint at the possibility of an intergenerational transmission of dissociative mental

states that is related to unresolved memories of past parental traumas.

                                                                                                         5
Trauma and dissociation in research findings based on the Adult Attachment Interview

       The emergence during administration of the AAI of memories of traumatic losses of

attachment figures, or of physical and sexual abuse suffered at the hand of attachment figures, is not

a rare occurrence. In about 15 per cent of non-clinical interviews (Lyons-Ruth & Jacobvitz, 1999

p.523; Steele & Steele, 2003, p.113) lapses, poor reflective capacity (i.e., poor metacognitive

monitoring) and incoherence in the narratives suggest that these traumatic experiences have not

been resolved (“unresolved” classification of the AAI). In these cases, to think that dissociative

processes related to the traumatic memories interfere with the report of one’s attachment history is,

at the very least, an educated guess (Hesse & Main, 2000, p. 1115; Liotti, 1992; Main & Morgan,

1996). An empirical finding supporting this conjecture has been provided by Hesse and van

IJzendoorn (1999): people who describe unresolved traumatic memories during the AAI also rate

high in a scale measuring the propensity toward absorption in daydreaming and self-hypnotic (i.e.,

dissociative) states of consciousness. Thus, there is a link between attachment-related traumas,

tendency toward dissociative states, and dissociated mental operations during a task involving

autobiographical memory.

       Another intriguing finding of studies based on the AAI shows the surfacing, in non-clinical

samples, of a different type of dissociative process, akin to the alternation of incompatible ego

states of DID. Some interviews are assigned to a “cannot classify” category because they express

deeply divided states of mind concerning attachment (Hesse, 1996). The simpler examples of

“cannot classify” interviews portray a dismissing attitude toward attachment in the first half of the

transcript, and a very preoccupied state of mind concerning attachment in the second half (or vice

versa), without any hint that the respondent is aware of the change in attitude during the interview.

Therefore, these interviews cannot be classified as “dismissing,” nor can they be classified as

“preoccupied”. Interestingly, most “cannot classify” interviews are also rated high for unresolved

traumas and/or losses (Hesse, 1996; Steele & Steele, 2003). This is a further hint that “cannot

                                                                                                        6
classify” interviews may indicate the presence of a type of sub-clinical post-traumatic dissociative

process, characterized both by poor metacognitive monitoring and by autobiographical memories

that are split as to the meaning attributed to events.

       In summary, research studies using the AAI have shown that subtle dissociative processes

related to traumatic memories of past attachment relationships (and potentially able to interfere with

the beginning organization of infant attachment behavior in the offspring) are not rare in adult non-

clinical samples. In samples that are at high risk of emotional disorders, in violent families and in

clinical samples, the percentage of “unresolved” and “cannot classify” interviews (and the

corresponding frequency of disorganized attachment classifications in the infants) rises sharply,

from the 15% found in non-clinical samples to over 70% (Lyons-Ruth & Jacobvitz, 1999; Solomon

& George, 1999).

       Steele and Steele (2003) reported some preliminary findings of a clinical study of severely

dissociative patients involving the AAI that show a very high percentage of “cannot classify”

interviews in this clinical population. When used with patients suffering from DID, the AAI

regularly elicits multiple narratives, and sometimes multiple narrating voices, in the same

individual. These multiple narratives reflect distinct ego states, or personality organizations, each

with a different mental state concerning attachment. Not infrequently in this clinical sample a

switch in ego state signals the narration of a horrifying history of abuse suffered at the hand of an

attachment figure that is not accessible to the preceding ego state.

       Steele and Steele (2003), while reporting the preliminary findings of their study, call

attention to an observation that can be confirmed by many clinicians dealing with the traumatic

memories of adult survivors of child abuse: “while psychic pain certainly accompanies the recall of

the abuse per se, this pales in comparison to the much greater pain that accompanies the recall of

being betrayed by trusted caregivers and siblings” (Steele & Steele, 2003, p. 116-117). That is, the

memory of an attachment figure who fails to protect the child from the abuse perpetrated by another

member of the family may be more painful than the memory of the abuse per se. The dissociative

                                                                                                        7
power of this subtle type of trauma, betrayal from a not otherwise maltreating attachment figure, is

readily explained by attachment theory. Forced by the inborn propensity to preserve the attachment

relationship and trust the caregiver, when a parent denies the very existence of the abuse perpetrated

by another member of the family (or by a person outside the family), the abused child may collude

with the parent’s denial and dissociate the traumatic memory (Bowlby, 1983, p. 99-118; Freyd,

1997).



Disorganization of early attachment and vulnerability to dissociation

         Infant disorganized attachment shows up as lack of orientation during attachment

interactions and/or as incompatible responses to episodes of separation-reunion with the caregiver,

emitted either simultaneously or in quick succession (Main & Solomon, 1990). The essence of

infant attachment disorganization is the simultaneity of approach and avoidance attitudes toward the

caregiver that induces a serious lack of organization and orientation in the infant’s overall

attachment behavior.

         The strong statistical link between infant disorganized behavior and parent’s unresolved

mental status as to trauma and losses (a finding that has been replicated in a great number of

research studies, reviewed by Lyons-Ruth & Jacobvitz, 1999 and Solomon & George, 1999) cannot

be explained by genetic influences. Infants whose attachment behavior toward a given,

“unresolved” parent is disorganized may develop coherent, organized patterns of attachment

behavior toward another caregiver, provided that the latter’s state of mind concerning attachment is

coherent (e.g., the same infant may be disorganized in the attachment behavior toward the

“unresolved” mother, organized-avoidant in the attachment toward the “dismissing” father, and

organized secure toward a third, “free” attachment figure). Disorganization of early attachment,

therefore, seems to reflect an intersubjective reality rather than being a property of the individual

child’s mind.



                                                                                                        8
       A number of empirical studies (Lyons-Ruth & Jacobvitz, 1999, p.524-525) support the

contention that individual (e.g., temperamental or neurological) variables exert minimal influence

on attachment disorganization. However, a recent study challenged this conclusion, suggesting that

genetic factors (an allele of the DRD4 gene) related to defective dopaminergic functions in the brain

and reduced efficiency of attentional systems, may contribute to attachment disorganization

(Lakatos et al., 2000). It should be noted that only a minority (less than 40%) of infants carrying the

allele develop a disorganized attachment: this genetic factor is, therefore, insufficient to yield

attachment disorganization by itself. The contrast between the studies quoted by Lyons-Ruth and

Jacobvitz (1999) and the genetic research data provided by Lakatos and his collaboratos (2000) may

be reconciled by the hypothesis that gene-environment interactions are at work in many, but not all,

cases of infant attachment disorganization.

       Liotti (1992) advanced the hypothesis that early disorganized attachment is the first step in

many developmental pathways that (provided they include traumatic experiences during childhood

and adolescence) progressively lead to increased vulnerability to dissociative disorders and to

dissociative reactions to later traumas. A similar hypothesis has been independently advanced by

Lichtenberg, Lachman and Fosshage (1992, p.164-168). Evidence supporting this hypothesis has

been provided by a longitudinal study of dissociative symptomatology in a non-clinical sample of

168 young adults (called the Minnesota longitudinal sample in the literature on attachment) whose

attachment patterns had been assessed when they were infants in their second year of life (Ogawa et

al., 1997). The group that had been disorganized in their attachments as infants (“disorganized”

group) had a higher mean dissociation score than those with other types of early attachment

patterns. Within this “disorganized” group, the higher dissociation scores, reaching clinical

significance, characterized the subgroup that had faced traumas during childhood and adolescence

(the difference between the mean dissociation score of the disorganized subgroup that faced later

trauma and those of the disorganized subgroup that did not face trauma was statistically significant).



                                                                                                       9
       Other observations in the Minnesota longitudinal sample that also support Liotti’s

hypothesis have been discussed by Carlson (1998). Infant disorganization was associated with

higher ratings of dissociative behavior on the Teacher Report form of the Child Behavior Checklist

both in elementary and high school, and with self-report of more dissociative experiences on the

Dissociative Experience Scale (DES) at age 19 (Carlson, 1998). Three adolescents in the Minnesota

longitudinal sample had developed clear-cut dissociative disorders at the time of Carlson’s inquiry;

all of them had been disorganized in their infant attachment to a primary caregiver (Dozier, Stovall

& Albus, 1999, p.507). Other empirical findings – although they have been less systematically

collected and are less methodologically satisfactory than the above-quoted longitudinal studies 

also point toward a role of attachment disorganization in disorders implying dissociation. These

findings have been reviewed elsewhere (Liotti, 1999, 2000).

       A multi-centric case-control study of 52 dissociative patients and 146 psychiatric non-

dissociative controls conducted by an Italian Group for the Study of Dissociation (Pasquini et al.,

2002) also lent support to Liotti’s hypothesis. Traumatic losses and severe traumatic events in the

life of the dissociative patients’ mothers that took place in the interval of two years before to two

years after the patients’ birth proved to be a significant risk factor for the development of

dissociative disorders. Since the traumas/losses in the life of the patients’ primary caregivers, being

likely still unresolved, exerted their effects in the period when the patients’ early attachments were

shaped, a legitimate interpretation of Pasquini et al.’s finding is that early disorganized attachment

is the mediator of this risk factor.

       The presence of traumas/losses in the life of the patients’ mothers around the time of the

birth of the patient is also a risk factor for Borderline Personality Disorder (BPD: Liotti et al.,

2000). Since it is commonly held that the developmental psychopathology of BPD often implies

both traumas and dissociation, the latter finding is compatible with the hypothesis that early

attachment disorganization increases, throughout development, the general propensity toward

dissociation. Clinically different types of dissociative reactions to traumatic events (as observed in

                                                                                                        10
dissociative disorders and BPD) may be linked to a common risk factor related to early attachment

disorganization.

       Besides the dissociative and borderline disorders, some complex types of PTSD may also be

related to early attachment disorganization. The empirical finding that PTSD in parents is linked to

vulnerability to PTSD in children (Yehuda, Halligan & Grossman, 2001) may be explained by

considering disorganization of children’s attachment to “unresolved” parents as a mediating

variable. The intergenerational transmission of trauma-related dissociation that many clinicians

hypothesize as an explanation of disorders observed in children of Holocaust survivors may also be

mediated by attachment disorganization (see, e.g. Fonagy, 1999). The unresolved traumatic

memories of the horrors of Nazi concentration camps may interfere with the parental behavior of

the survivors, inducing attachment disorganization in their offspring and in turn increasing the

offspring’s vulnerability to trauma-related disorders, implying dissociation. There is some empirical

support for this hypothesis (Solomon, Kotler & Mikulincer, 1988). It should be emphasized

however, as will be more widely discussed in a later section of this paper, that pathological

developments are by no means the rule in children of Holocaust survivors.



Attachment dynamics linking parents’ unresolved mental state to infants’ disorganization

       The strong statistical link between parents’ unresolved traumatic memories of past abuses or

losses and infants’ disorganized attachment can be understood by taking into account the inborn

nature of attachment interpersonal dynamics. Attachment theory holds that humans, like other

mammals, are born with a strong, evolved tendency to seek care, help and comfort from members

of the social group whenever they are facing an overwhelming danger and whenever they are

suffering from physical or emotional distress (Bowlby, 1982). As Bowlby (1979) has cogently

argued, the care-seeking or attachment system, although more often active during infancy and

childhood, is operant throughout any human being’s life, and is powerfully activated during and

after any experience of fear and of physical or psychological pain. Usually, the propensity to seek

                                                                                                      11
protection and comfort is met with positive responses from significant others. The inborn

disposition to care for one’s kin (George & Solomon, 1999), that matches the equally inborn

tendency to ask for help, provides the basis for a relatively smooth functioning of caregiving-

careseeking interactions. Ethological observations and affective neuroscience (Panksepp, 1998)

provide abundant evidence of the evolutionary processes that build up, in homologous parts of any

mammal species’ brain, distinct emotional/motivational systems able to organize, respectively,

care-seeking (i.e., attachment) and care-giving behavior. On these theoretical premises, one may

explain attachment disorganization as follows (see Main & Hesse, 1990, for the original

formulation of this explanation).

       When unresolved traumatic memories surface in the mind of parents while they are

responding to the attachment requests of their children, the mental suffering linked to these

memories activates the parents’ attachment system together with their care-giving system. That the

attachment system is normally activated not only in children, but also in adults (“from the cradle to

the grave”: Bowlby, 1979, p.129) by any type of suffering is, as has been noted above, a central

tenet of attachment theory. In the absence of soothing responses from significant others (perceived

as “stronger and/or wiser” than the suffering self: Bowlby, 1979, p.129), the activation of the

attachment system arouses in the parent strong emotions of fear and/or anger. Thus, while infants

are crying, “unresolved” parents may interrupt their attempts to soothe them (attempts stemming

from the parent’s care-giving system) with unwitting, abrupt manifestations of alarm and/or of

anger (stemming from the parent’s attachment system). Caregivers’ abrupt manifestation of both

anger and fear are always frightening to infants. The innate defensive reaction of escaping from the

signal of threat (e.g., by distracting attention or avoidance of gaze) ensues in the infant.

       The increased relational distance, however, further activates the (equally inborn) infant’s

attachment system, because increased distance from the attachment figure innately strengthens the

need for protective proximity, whatever the behavior of the attachment figure may be. The

attachment figure, in interactions leading to attachment disorganization, is “at once the source and

                                                                                                     12
the solution” (Main & Hesse, 1990, p.163) of the infant’s alarm, and this leads to fright without

solution. That is, the infant has no way out of this paradox. There is no single, coherent behavioral

or attentional strategy able to interrupt the loop of increasing fear and contradictory intentions

(approach and avoidance) in the infant’s experience. Disorganization of attachment behavior and

disorientation in attentional strategies during attachment interactions follow. Disorganization and

disorientation of early attachment closely mimic the collapse of the integrative functions of

consciousness that characterize any dissociative experience, and may be the first instance of

dissociative reactions during life.

       At least two studies (reviewed by Lyons-Ruth & Jacobvitz, 1999, p. 530-531) provided

empirical support to Main and Hesse’s 1990 hypothesis that frightened/frightening parental

behavior is the link between an infant’s disorganized attachment and a caregiver’s unresolved state

of mind concerning attachment. These studies, and others following Main and Hesse’s original

observations (Hesse & Main, 2000; Hesse et al., 2003), provide many disquieting examples of how

a parent’s state of mind, unresolved as to traumas, may interfere in the communication between

parent and child. It is noteworthy that parents’ unresolved states of mind can induce fright without

solution and dissociative reactions in the infant even when the parents’ behavior does not obviously

constitute maltreatment. For instance, while seemingly trying to soothe the infant’s cry, an

unresolved parent approaches her child from behind, sliding both hands around the infant’s neck;

other parents freeze, with a “dead” stare, unblinking, in the face of the infant’s cry for help; some

parents manifest a paradoxically deferential attitude toward the infant; still other seem to seek safety

and comfort from the infant, in a patent inversion of the attachment relationship.

       Interactions involving a strong activation of the attachment system that although not

obviously comprising maltreatment, can induce a failure in the integrative functions of

consciousness at the beginning of life, deserve the name of “early relational trauma” (Schore,

2001). Early relational trauma (leading to attachment disorganization) seems to exert negative

influences on the infant’s developing brain. The right-brain system (connecting limbic emotional

                                                                                                        13
centers to the neocortex through the cross-road of the orbitofrontal cortex) that is involved in coping

with emotional stressors develops along unfavorable lines in the face of chronic early relational

traumas (Schore, 2001, 2002). This may be the neurological basis for the vulnerability to

dissociative reactions in response to traumatic stressors later in life.

       It is worth noticing that when early attachment disorganization is followed by traumas

inflicted by the parents during childhood and adolescence (very likely, not a rare occurrence), the

new traumatic interactions are a renewal and a confirmation, on a wider scale of intensity, of the

frightening parent-child relationship that was responsible for attachment disorganization since

infancy. On the other hand, it is of the outmost importance to remember that early disorganized

attachment by no means condemns anybody to later dissociative disorders or to vulnerability to

PTSD: during development, many corrective experiences of attachment and many protective factors

may intervene in safeguarding the once disorganized infant from any pathological consequence. For

instance, other attachment figures may provide the child with positive attachment experiences,

thereby exerting a corrective influence on the memory structures of disorganized attachment

developed in the relationship with the “unresolved” parent. Or the parent that had been

“unresolved” may become gradually capable (e.g., thanks to psychotherapy) of elaborating personal

traumatic memories, thereby offering, over the years, a progressively more secure and stable type of

attachment experiences to the child (for a more detailed discussion of the different developmental

pathways that may stem from early disorganized attachment, see Liotti, 1992, p. 201).



Dissociation within the internal working model of disorganized attachment

       Traumatic experiences, attachment dynamics and dissociative reactions are, in the above

outlined research paradigm, inextricably intertwined, like three threads woven into a single strand.

This strand may extend into developmental pathways leading, in the presence of later traumas, to

complex forms of PTSD, dissociative disorders and BPD. Understanding the memory



                                                                                                      14
representation of early relational trauma is necessary in order to follow such developmental

pathways.

       According to attachment theory, the memories of attachment interactions are the basis for

the construction of Internal Working Models (IWM) of self, of the attachment figures and of their

accessibility or inaccessibility. The IWM is conceptualized as a cognitive structure based on

generalized memories of past interactions with the attachment figure and providing expectations as

to his/her future responses to the child’s attachment needs. When activated, an IWM can co-opt all

the typical emotions of the attachment motivational system (fear of separation, anger-protest at

expected separations, sadness, joy at reunion, felt security, etc.). At the beginning of life, the IWM

is a structure of implicit memory (Amini et al., 1996), that is, a part of the type of memory that does

not require language nor consciousness for its operations. (In contrast, explicit memory is conscious

and mediated by language; it can operate both on a semantic level of generalized meanings or on an

episodic level of retrieved specific events). During development, part of the formerly implicit IWM

may become explicit and enter both in the consciously held meanings attributed to attachment needs

and into the narratives of autobiographic memory.

       Although open to modification because of later attachment experiences, the early IWMs

show a remarkable stability over time (presumably because the relational style between child and

parents also remains stable: Bowlby, 1982, 1983). Once established, the IWM guides both

attachment behavior and the appraisal of attachment emotions in self and others. If the attachment

figure has been accessible to the child in real-life situations, the corresponding IWM of the

developing child conveys an inner sense of legitimacy of the attachment emotions and of potential

accessibility of help and comfort even when the attachment figure is not actually present during

distressing experiences. This is the IWM of secure attachments. On the contrary, the IWMs of

insecure attachments (avoidant, ambivalent or disorganized) convey expectations that the

attachment figure will not be available or will respond negatively to requests of help and comfort.

The IWM of disorganized attachment differs from that of avoidant and ambivalent attachments

                                                                                                      15
because it not only prefigures negative consequences of asking for help and comfort, it also brings

on a dissociated (non-integrated) multiplicity of dramatic and contradictory expectations (Hesse &

Main, 1999, 2000; Hesse et al., 2003; Liotti, 1992, 1995, 1999, 2000, 2002; Main, 1995; Main &

Hesse, 1992; Main & Morgan, 1996).



Disorganized attachment and the “drama triangle”

       In order to summarize the components of the multiple, dramatic and reciprocally non-

integrated (i.e., dissociated) representations that compose the IWM of disorganized attachment,

Liotti (1999, 2000, 2002) proposed use as a metaphor of the concept of “drama triangle” –

originally formulated by Karpman (1968) with the purpose of identifying the basic structure both of

fairy tales and of tragic plays in classic theater. This metaphor suggests that the disorganized child

has reasons for construing, simultaneously or in quick sequence, both the attachment figure and the

self according to the three basic positions of the drama triangle: persecutor, rescuer and victim. The

attachment figure is represented negatively, as the cause of the ever-growing fear experienced by

the self (self as victim of a persecutor), but also positively, as a rescuer: the parent, although

frightened by unresolved traumatic memories, is nevertheless usually willing to offer comfort to the

child, and the child may feel such comforting availability in conjunction with the fear. Together

with these two opposed representations of the attachment figure (persecutor and rescuer) meeting a

vulnerable and helpless (victim) self, the IWM of disorganized attachment also conveys a negative

representation of a powerful, evil self meeting a fragile or even devitalised attachment figure

(persecutor self, held responsible for the fear expressed by the attachment figure). Moreover, there

is the possibility, for the child, of representing both the self and the attachment figure as the helpless

victims of a mysterious, invisible source of danger. And finally, since the frightened attachment

figure may be comforted by the tender feelings evoked by contact with the child, the implicit

memories of disorganized attachment may also convey the possibility of construing the self as the

powerful rescuer of a fragile attachment figure (i.e., the little child perceives the self as able to

                                                                                                        16
comfort a frightened adult). Indirect empirical support to this hypothesis is provided by data

indicating that formerly disorganized infants assume, when they reach school age, either caregiving

(rescuer) or punitive (persecutor) attitudes toward their caregivers (Hesse & Main, 2000; Hesse et

al., 2003; Lyons-Ruth & Jacobvitz, 1999).

       The sequence, in the child’s mind, of multiple representations in which both the self and the

other person shift among the three incompatible roles of persecutor, rescuer and victim should be

understood as a metaphorical rendition of the construction of contradictory emotional (i.e., pre-

verbal) schemata that arose during the interactions that led to disorganized attachment. These

emotional-relational mental structures, encoded in implicit memory, are too complex and

intrinsically contradictory to be later synthesized in a unitary, cohesive structure of explicit,

semantic memory. In this sense, the IWM of early disorganized attachment is intrinsically

dissociative (for a general discussion of dissociation in the context of the operations of the

attachment system see Cortina, 2003, p.285-286).

       A dynamic understanding of the role of early attachment disorganization in the vulnerability

to trauma-related disorders requires consideration of the consequences of an intrinsically

dissociated IWM when facing later traumas. This will be the topic of the next two sections.



The pathway leading from attachment disorganization to trauma-related disorders

       Whenever, from infancy to old age, human beings are called to cope with a traumatic

stressor, their attachment system is activated (i.e., they experience a strong wish to seek help and

comfort). When the operations of the attachment system are guided by an insecure IWM, emotional

reactions to distressing experiences may be made even more painful by the automatic inner

evaluation that one’s wishes for comfort are either illegitimate or produce additional painful

interactions with the attachment figures. Attachment theory suggests, on these grounds, that all

types of insecure IWMs may generically increase the vulnerability to trauma-related emotional

disorders (while, in contrast, the IWM of secure attachment is a protective factor: Adam, Keller &

                                                                                                       17
West, 1995; Dozier, Stovall & Albus, 1999). The IWM of early disorganized attachment adds

specificity to this generic vulnerability, in the direction of greatly facilitating dissociative reactions

to later traumas throughout the lifespan. Figure 1 summarizes this line of reasoning.

                       /-------------------------------------------------------------------/

                                        insert Figure 1 here

                       /------------------------------------------------------------------/

       The diagram acknowledges that, besides early disorganized attachment, other risk factors

intervene in the pathogenesis of disorders that imply dissociation. Genetic, temperamental and

neurobiological vulnerabilities, the severity and type of traumatic experiences during childhood and

adolescence, and the individual organization of mental defenses against psychological pain may be

legitimately considered among these risk factors. The inclusion of BPD among the disorders whose

pathogenesis involves dissociation is supported by the fact that transient dissociative experiences

are among the DSM-IV diagnostic criteria for BPD (American Psychiatric Association, 1994). The

inclusion of PTSD is justified by the finding that peritraumatic dissociation (i.e., dissociative states

of mind taking place during or immediately after a traumatic experience) is often the first step in the

genesis of this disorder (Birmes et al., 2001; Cardeña et al., 1993; Harvey & Briant, 1998; Marmar

et al., 1994; Shalev et al., 1996; Ursano et al., 1999).

       We should now address an important question: what happens to the dissociated

representations of the drama triangle before they are elicited by a traumatic stressor? Are they

simply dormant, or are they actively kept at bay by some type of mental-relational strategy?

Research findings on the developmental pathways stemming from infant attachment disorganization

suggest that the second possibility is closer to the truth.



Developmental pathways stemming from early attachment disorganization

       Two prospective longitudinal studies (reviewed by Lyons-Ruth & Jacobvitz, 1999, p. 532-

533) demonstrate a shift from disorganized attachment in infancy to a type of child behavior toward

                                                                                                         18
the caregiver at age 6 that has been labeled “controlling”. Over 80% of school-age children who

have been classified “disorganized” in infancy display either punitive-dominant or care-giving

behavior toward the attachment figure. These two attitudes have both been subsumed under the

heading “controlling” because through either of them the child can exert active control on “the

parent’s attention and behavior and assume a role which is usually considered more appropriate for

a parent with reference to a child” (Main & Cassidy, 1988, p.418).

       Children who exert control over the parent through a care-giving strategy seem to have

inverted the usual direction of the attachment interaction, as if these children have activated, instead

of their attachment system, their care-giving motivational system. This explanation of the

motivational underpinnings of the controlling strategy is based on the consideration that the care-

giving system is as innate in mammalian species as the care-seeking (i.e., attachment) system (cf.

George & Solomon, 1999; Gilbert, 1989; Panksepp, 1998). Children who control the parent (in

relation to whom their infant attachment was disorganized) through punitive-dominant strategies

seem to have activated another inborn motivational system to substitute for the normal activation of

the attachment system: namely, the evolved system that regulates interactions aimed at defining the

reciprocal roles of dominance and submission in the social group of most mammals species

(identified by ethologists as the social-ranking system: Gilbert, 1989). The interaction of

controlling-punitive children with their parents seems regulated more often by an aggressive

striving for dominance than by care-seeking (Sloman et al., 2002).

       To recapitulate and clarify: when a disorganized IWM dominate them since infancy, the

activities of the attachment system tend to be inhibited throughout development. Another inborn

motivational system (i.e., the social-ranking or the care-giving system) intervenes instead of the

attachment system to regulate the interactions between child and parent. The defensive activation of

another motivational system in response to a disorganized IWM of attachment should not

necessarily be construed as a purely intra-psychic process. Rather, there are empirical observations

suggesting that the choice of the motivational system that defensively substitutes for the attachment

                                                                                                      19
system is influenced by the caregivers’ attitudes. Parents who show frightened/frightening

behaviors toward their (disorganized) children also display toward them an unusual array of

submissive, care-seeking or even sexualized behaviors (Hesse et al., 2003). These competitively

aggressive, care-giving or sexualized interactions, substituting for the activation of the attachment

system, limit the influence of its IWM on the child’s current thought, emotion and behavior (Liotti,

2000, 2002). They, however, do not correct nor cancel the IWM of disorganized attachment from

the child’s mind, as becomes obvious when the child’s attachment system is activated by conditions

that are able to overcome its relative inhibition. For instance, 6 year old controlling children appear

well oriented and organized in their thinking, behavioral and attentional strategies until they are

shown the pictures of a version of the Separation Anxiety Test (Main, Kaplan & Cassidy, 1985).

These pictures portray situations that are able to powerfully activate a child’s attachment system

(e.g., parents leaving a child alone). Once the system is thus activated, the formerly organized

strategies of thought and behavior of controlling children collapse: the underlying disorganization

(dissociation) of their mental operations is suddenly revealed by the unrealistic, catastrophic and

utterly incoherent narratives produced in response to the pictures (an illustration of these narratives

may be found in Hesse et al., 2003).

       The collapse of the seemingly coherence-yielding strategy of controlling/disorganized

children in the face of a powerful activation of the attachment system illustrates an important

process in the pathogenesis of trauma-related disorders based on a disorganized IWM. The relative

inhibition of the attachment system through the defensive activation of other equally inborn

motivational systems (the care-giving, the social-ranking, and/or perhaps the sexual system, as may

occur in some sexually abusive families) is forcefully suspended under the influence of a powerful

stressor. The coherence of thought, emotion and behavior that has been secured thanks to the

defensive activation of other motivational systems disappears. The intrinsically dissociative IWM of

disorganized attachment intervenes (together with the not always overwhelming emotions evoked

by the stressor) in determining the dissociative response. This type of pathogenetic process may

                                                                                                      20
explain the intriguing cases of delayed manifestation or exacerbation of a dissociative disorder

years after the original traumatic experience and without any repetition of the trauma.



Delayed dissociative responses to traumatic memories

        The issue of the veracity of delayed recall of childhood abuse has been the subject of much

legal and scientific controversy in recent years (for recent reviews see, e.g., Bremner, 2003;

McNally, 2003; Mollon, 2002). This controversy may have hindered the exploration of the equally

important theoretical problem posed by the emergence of delayed dissociative reactions to

traumatic memories that had been always accessible to recall. A clinical vignette will illustrate this

problem.

        Diana, a 33 years old physician, is married to a colleague and the mother of a 5 year old child. She always
remembered that her father had sexually abused her when she was a child. She reacted to the incest by making an
adamant decision to protect her younger sister from her father’s abusive behavior. She was convinced that she
had been totally successful in this task. Compulsive care-giving, which may have later motivated her professional
vocation, seemed the basis of her coping strategy. By devoting herself to preventing and alleviating other
people’s illnesses, she had been able to attribute meaning to her own sufferings. As an adult, Diana never
manifested either subjectively felt or observable dissociative symptoms, until she was told (at age 33) by her
sister, now 25, that she, too, had been sexually abused by their father. Immediately thereafter, Diana started
having problems with memory and concentration, suffered from sleep disturbances, experienced hypnagogic
hallucinations and terrifying nightmares almost every night, and panicked because of abrupt episodes of
depersonalization. She felt threatened by the uncanny feeling of impending grotesque transformations both of
outside reality and of her own body. Psychotherapeutic work focused successfully on the interpretation of her
ailments as the consequence of a collapse of her defensive strategy, which had been based on the representation
of self as an almost omnipotent rescuer. The collapse followed the revelation that, contrary to what she had
believed for almost twenty years, she had been unable to shelter her sister from her father’s incestuous
approaches. Having lost confidence in her ability to take care of others, Diana now abruptly realized that she,
too, needed help and comfort. The experience of this need was frightening to her since it emerged in her
consciousness together with fragmented, contradictory expectations of how people would respond to it. For
instance, she imagined that people seemingly available to provide sympathetic listening to her suffering would
suddenly reveal themselves as “monsters of evilness,” or that they would withdraw because they would come to
“realize” that she harbored an evil, dissociated alternate personality.




                                                                                                                  21
       This clinical vignette exemplifies the possibility that major changes in the meaning of

significant relationships precipitate until then latent dissociative processes that had been held at bay

thanks to the defensive inhibition of a disorganized IWM. This possibility may reconcile two

seemingly opposite theses: (1) the thesis that delayed recall of trauma lends credence to the

authenticity of memories, insofar as it is preceded or accompanied by dissociative symptoms, and

(2) the thesis that preexisting dissociative mental processes may amplify and distort traumatic

memories, thereby laying the ground open for the possible construction of false memories of abuse

during retrieval of traumatic memories (for recent renditions of this debate, see Bremner, 2003,

Mollon, 2002, and McNally, 2003). Insofar as the reactivation of a disorganized IWM is

responsible for the appearance of dissociative symptoms, both possibilities may coexist. On the one

hand, the propensity, linked to the disorganized IWM, to construe both self and others according to

the drama triangle may sometimes foster exaggerated memories of evil deeds (e.g., an attachment

figure is reconstructed according to the stereotype of the persecutor, and the self according to the

stereotype of the helpless frightened victim). On the other, the very existence of a disorganized

IWM hints, to the very least, at the veracity of early relational trauma, even when no other seriously

traumatic event might have happened.



Attachment dynamics and the definition of traumatic stressor

       How the term “trauma” should be defined in conceptualizing the genesis of PTSD is,

according to critics, quite problematic (McNally, 2003). Included among traumas considered

potentially capable of causing PTSD are such qualitatively different events as direct threats to a

person’s life or physical integrity, and merely witnessing other people’s exposure to those threats

(American Psychiatric Association, 1994, p. 427). When two so conceptually distinct classes of

events are both deemed causally related to the same disorder (PTSD), “it will be difficult to identify

common psychobiologic mechanisms underlying symptomatic expression” (McNally, 2003, p.231).



                                                                                                       22
       The model of vulnerability to traumas described here addresses McNally’s concerns insofar

as it identifies in the attachment system such a common psychobiologic mechanism, capable of

being activated both by threats to one’s own life or integrity (e.g., fear that help is not forthcoming)

and by witnessing other people similarly threatened (e.g., fear of losing the source of help). If

careful consideration is paid to the contribution of attachment dynamics to the experience of

trauma, then it becomes clear that there is an important difference not between direct and

secondhand exposure to traumatic stressors, but between traumas inflicted by an attachment figure

and traumas inflicted by an anonymous destructive force. Attachment theory predicts that the

dissociating potential of the former is much greater than that of the latter (cf. Freyd, 1997).

       The wide-ranging implications of this prediction for our understanding of the pathogenesis

of trauma-related disorders is illustrated by reflections on recent findings concerning the

intergenerational transmission of traumatic experiences in three-generation families of Holocaust

survivors (Sagi-Schwartz et al., 2003). The daughters of female Holocaust survivors did not differ

from the comparison group in terms of attachment representations, emotional disorders,

vulnerability to PTSD, and maternal behavior toward their infants. This is a surprising finding,

since the AAIs of Holocaust survivors (who lost parents and other family members in the Nazi

concentration camps) still evidenced, after half a century, a very high percentage of unresolved

states of mind concerning attachment (Sagi, van IJzendoorn, Joels & Scharf, 2002).

       What factors could account for this difference from so many other samples (Lyons-Ruth &

Jacobvitz, 1999), in which unresolved states of mind in the parents were strongly linked to

attachment disorganization in the children? The possible answer is that, in these other samples,

many unresolved states of mind were related to traumas inflicted by attachment figures (e.g., incest

and/or parental violence toward the child) while in the Holocaust survivors traumas and losses were

the deed of anonymous human beings. Moreover, before being relegated to the concentration

camps, the children that survived the holocaust had benefited from years of secure attachment to

their parents (Sagi-Schwartz et al., 2003, p.1091). In other words, the female survivors of the

                                                                                                      23
Holocaust might have been “unresolved” at the AAI classification, without having been

disorganized in their early attachments, while most “unresolved” parents in other AAI samples had

also been disorganized in their early attachments to their maltreating (i.e., frightening) caregivers.

This interpretation, that seems quite plausible, further emphasizes the role of early disorganized

attachment both in inducing long-term dissociative reactions (predictive of complex forms of later

PTSD) after exposure to traumatic stressors, and in the intergenerational transmission of attachment

patterns. This role is entrenched with that of the painful emotional experiences (dictated by the

exposure to trauma) and with that of unresolved memories, and is at least equally important to if not

more important than traumatic distress and unresolved memories of trauma.

       To recapitulate: rather than striving for a definition of traumatic stressors based on the

characteristics of external events, attachment theory suggests regarding trauma as related to

unprocessed affect derived from the attachment figure that lives on in somatic states not integrated

with the flow of explicit memory (Diamond, 2003, p.410). This affect may remain relatively

dormant until, elicited by a stressor, it intervenes in disorganizing the integrative functions of the

patient’s consciousness, memory and identity. Affect remains unprocessed, and therefore recorded

only in bodily states (van der Kolk, 1994), insofar as it is not linked to the structures of semantic

self-knowledge. The structures of semantic self-knowledge more relevant for the processing of

affects are related to the dynamics of attachment (cf. also Schore, 2001, 2002). Unprocessed affects

would be those emerging from disorganized attachments, since they, although related to a single

class of events (i.e., attachment interactions to a specific caregiver), are too contradictory to be

integrated in a unitary semantic structure.



Some consequences for the psychotherapy of trauma-related disorders

       The main consequence of the thesis of this paper for the psychotherapy of complex trauma-

related disorders is that patients’ interpersonal difficulties should receive at least as much attention

as their traumatic memories, their dissociative experiences and their dissociative defenses. The

                                                                                                         24
knowledge of the mental processes linked to attachment disorganization should guide the therapist’s

understanding of these difficulties  as illustrated by clinical studies focusing on the

phenomenological overlap and the developmental continuity between infants’ disorganized

attachment behavior and the behavior of adult dissociative patients within the therapeutic

relationship (Fonagy, 1999; Liotti,1993, 1995; Liotti & Intreccialagli, 2003; Muscetta et al.,1999).

Whenever there is a hint that a disorganized IWM is guiding the patient’s way of construing the

therapeutic relationship, the correction of such a model should become a primary aim of the

treatment.

       Clinicians willing to introduce principles of attachment theory into their therapeutic practice

may find it useful to consult the now abundant references on the applications of this theory to

various types of psychotherapy. Cortina (2003), Fonagy (1999, 2001), Holmes (1996), Marrone

(1998), Shane, Shane and Gales (1997) and Slade (1999) provided important contributions to the

integration of principles of attachment theory within the practice of various types of psychodynamic

psychotherapy. Cognitively oriented psychotherapists may find useful suggestions for integrating

attachment principles into their clinical practice by referring to writings by Liotti (1991, 1993),

Liotti and Intreccialagli (2003) and Safran and Segal (1990). Family therapists will find, to the same

effect, invaluable information in the works of Byng-Hall (1995, 1999) and Sloman et al. (2002).

       Guidelines for the psychotherapy of complex trauma-related disorders that, even if they do

not focus explicitly on attachment dynamics, are compatible with the above principles have been

advocated in recent years (for reviews, see Courtois, 1997; Liotti, Mollon & Miti, in press).

According to these guidelines, striving for safety and alliance within the therapeutic relationship

should take precedence, both temporally and in the hierarchy of therapeutic aims throughout the

treatment, over trauma work (i.e., on the reliving of traumatic memories in therapy). Phase-oriented

treatments in which stabilization of the therapeutic relationship precedes trauma work has been

made necessary by the widespread observation that trauma-centered therapies (that are often highly



                                                                                                      25
effective for simple types of PTSD) can exacerbate rather than resolve the patients’ difficulties in

complex PTSD.

         At least three psychotherapeutic models for the treatment of trauma-related disorders have

been recently proposed that make explicit reference to attachment disorganization as part of their

rationale for paying more therapeutic attention to the patients’ past and present relational difficulties

than to their traumatic memories (Blizard, 2001; Gold, 2000; Steele, van der Hart & Nijenhuis,

2001).

         The model proposed by Steele, van der Hart and Nijenhuis (2001) focuses on the difference

between secure and insecure dependency (defined in relation to attachment theory), and suggests

striving to overcome “phobias of attachment” be a major focus from the first phase of the treatment.

Steele, van der Hart and Nijenhuis (2001) offer a detailed description of how phobias of attachment

and insecure dependency manifest themselves in patients with disorganized attachment, and provide

many useful hints at therapeutic maneuvers that may deal with these manifestations.

         The model outlined by Blizard (2001) highlights the relational dilemma of attachment

disorganization by stating that in order to maintain attachment, traumatic memories of abuses

suffered at the hand of family members must be dissociated, but to protect the self from abuse, the

need for attachment must be disavowed. This relational dilemma, she asserts, should be addressed

throughout the treatment.

         Contextual therapy of complex PTSD, as Gold (2000) calls his approach, focuses on

developing the patients’ capacities for secure attachments and for more comfortable relationships

through three primary components of the treatment: collaborative relating (i.e., alliance building),

collaborative conceptualization (i.e., dispelling beliefs of being undeserving and incapable of

satisfactory attachment and cooperative interactions) and skill transmission (i.e., social skills

training similar to the one deployed in Dialectic Behavior Therapy: Linehan, 1993). Gold et al.

(2001) describe three cases of DID successfully treated according to the principles of contextual

therapy. These cases illustrate how, when the relational difficulties stemming from disorganized

                                                                                                       26
attachment are successfully dealt with in psychotherapy, the process of resolving the traumatic

memories and of giving up dissociative defenses is also set into motion.

       The importance of having two or more therapists cooperating in the treatment of patients

with complex trauma-related disorders, as for instance in Dialectic Behavior Therapy (DBT:

Linehan, 1993), is highlighted by the knowledge of attachment disorganization. When the patient is

guided by an IWM of disorganized attachment in construing the therapist’s behavior, the

therapeutic relationship may become unbearably dramatic, changeable and complex for both

partners (Liotti, 1995, 2000, 2002). Untoward countertransferential reactions, or premature

termination of an otherwise promising treatment, may be the unfortunate consequence of the

reactivation of a disorganized IWM within the therapeutic relationship. The presence of a second

therapist (e.g., a group therapist as in DBT) to whom the patient is usually less strongly and less

dramatically attached may be of great assistance in dealing with the difficulties emerging in the first

therapeutic relationship (for a more detailed analysis of this possibility, and some clinical

illustrations, see Liotti, 2000, 2002).

       All these innovative guidelines for the psychotherapy of complex trauma-related disorders

may, in the not too distant future, yield outcomes studies supporting, or falsifying, the hypothesis

implied by the research findings reviewed in this paper: when the contribution of disorganized

attachment to the disorder is successfully dealt with, traumatic memories become more easily

integrated and dissociative defenses are less difficult to relinquish.




                                                                                                       27
                                    ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The Author gratefully acknowledges Dr. Steven Gold’s invaluable assistance in making readable

the English of this paper, and in suggesting how to clarify and elaborate themes that otherwise

would have remained obscure or relatively neglected.




                                                                                                  28
                                             References

Adam, K.S., Keller, A.E., West, M. (1995) Attachment organization and vulnerability to loss,

       separation and abuse in disturbed adolescents. In Goldberg, S., Muir, R. & Kerr, J. (eds),

       Attachment Theory: Social, developmental and clinical perspectives. Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic

       Press. (pp. 309-341).

Ainsworth, M.D.S. (1982) Attachment: retrospect and prospect. In C. M. Parkes & J. Stevenson-

       Hinde (eds.), The place of attachment in human behavior. London: Tavistock (pp. 3-30).

American Psychiatric Association (1994) Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders, 4th

       ed: DSM-IV. Washington,DC: American Psychiatric Association.

Amini, F., Lewis, T., Lannon, R., Louie, A., Baumbacher, G., McGuinnes, T. & Zirker, E. (1996)

       Affect, attachment, memory: Contributions toward psychobiologic integration. Psychiatry,

       59, 213-239

Birmes, P., Carreras, D., Charlet, J.P., Warner, B.A., Lauque, D. & Schmitt, L. (2001) Peritraumatic

       dissociation and posttraumatic stress disorder in victims of violent assault. Journal of

       Nervous and Mental Disease, 189: 796-798.

Blizard, R.A. (2001) Masochistic and sadistic ego states: Dissociative solutions to the dilemma of

       attachment to an abusive caregiver. Journal of Trauma & Dissociation, 2: 37-58.

Bowlby, J. (1979) The making and breaking of affectional bonds. London: Tavistock Publications.

Bowlby, J. (1982) Attachment and loss. Vol.1: Attachment (2nd edition). London: Hogarth Press.

Bowlby, J. (1988) A secure base. London: Routledge.

Bremner, J.D. (2003) Clinical, legal and scientific issues related to delayed recall of childhood

       abuse. Bridging Eastern and Western Psychiatry, 1: 39-46.

Byng-Hall, J. (1995) Creating a secure family base: some implications of attachment theory for

       family therapy. Family Process, 34: 45-58.

Byng-Hall, J. (1999) Family and couple therapy: Toward greater security. In Cassidy, J. & Shaver

       P.R. (eds), Handbook of attachment. New York: Guilford (pp. 625-647).

                                                                                                     29
Cardena, E. & Spiegel, D. (1993) Dissociative reactions to the San Francisco Bay Area earthquake

       of 1989. American Journal of Psychiatry, 150: 474-478.

Carlson, E.A. (1998) A prospective longitudinal study of disorganized/disoriented attachment.

       Child Development, 69: 1970-1979.

Cortina, M. (2003) Defensive processes, emotions and internal working models: A perspective from

       attachment theory and contemporary models of the mind. In Cortina, M. & Marrone, M.

       (eds.) Attachment theory and the psychoanalytic process. London: Whurr (pp.271-306).

Courtois, C.A. (1997) Healing the incest wound: A treatment update with attention to the

       recovered- memory issue. American Journal of Psychotherapy, 51: 464-496.

Diamond, N. (2003) Attachment, trauma and the body. In Cortina, M. & Marrone, M. (eds.)

       Attachment theory and the psychoanalytic process. London: Whurr (pp.409-429).

Dozier, M., Stovall, K.C. & Albus, K.E. (1999) Attachment and psychopathology in adulthood. In

       Cassidy, J. & Shaver P.R. (eds), Handbook of attachment. New York: Guilford (pp. 497-

       519).

Fonagy, P. (1999) The transgenerational transmission of holocaust trauma: Lessons learned from

       the analysis of an adolescent with obsessive-compulsive disorder. Attachment and Human

       Development, 1: 92-114.

Fonagy, P. (2001) Attachment theory and psychoanalysis. New York: Other Press.

Freyd, J.J. (1997) Betrayal trauma: The logic of forgetting child abuse. Cambridge, MA: Harvard

       University Press.

George, C. & Solomon, J. (1999) Attachment and caregiving: The caregiving behavioral system. In

       Cassidy, J. & Shaver P.R. (eds), Handbook of attachment. New York: Guilford (pp. 649-

       671).

Gilbert, P. (1989) Human nature and suffering. London: LEA.

Gold, S.N. (2000) Not trauma alone: Therapy for child abuse survivors in family and social

       context. Philadelphia: Brunner/Routledge.

                                                                                                  30
Gold, S.N., Elhai, J.D., Rea, B.D., Weiss, D., Masino, T., Morris, S.L. & McInich, J. (2001)

       Contextual treatment of dissociative identity disorder: Three case studies. Journal of

       Trauma & Dissociation, 2: 5-35.

Gunderson, J.C. & Sabo, A. (1993) The phenomenological and conceptual interface between

       borderline personality disorder and post-traumatic stress disorder. American Journal of

       Psychiatry, 150: 19-27.

Harvey, A.G. & Briant, R.A. (1998) The effects of attempted though suppression in acute stress

       disorder. Behavior Research and Therapy, 36: 583-590.

Hesse, E. (1996) Discourse, memory and the Adult Attachment Interview: A note with emphasis on

       the emerging cannot classify category. Infant Mental Health Journal, 17: 4-11.

Hesse, E. (1999) The Adult Attachment Interview: Historical and current perspectives. In Cassidy,

       J. & Shaver P.R. (eds), Handbook of attachment. New York: Guilford (pp. 395-433).

Hesse, E. & van IJzendoorn, M.H. (1999) Propensities toward absorption are related to lapses in the

       monitoring of reasoning or discourse during the Adult Attachment Interview: A preliminary

       investigation. Attachment and Human Development, 1: 67-91.

Hesse, E. & Main, M. (2000) Disorganized infant, child and adult attachment: Collapse in

       behavioral and attentional strategies. Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Association,

       48: 1097-1127.

Hesse, E., Main, M., Abrams, K.Y. & Rifkin, A. (2003) Unresolved states regarding loss or abuse

       can have “second-generation” effects: Disorganized, role-inversion and frightening ideation

       in the offspring of traumatized non-maltreating parents. In D.J. Siegel & M.F. Solomon

       (eds), Healing trauma: Attachment, mind, body and brain. New York: Norton (pp.57-106).

Holmes, J. (1996) Attachment, intimacy, autonomy: Using attachment theory in adult

       psychotherapy. Northville, NJ: Jason Aronson.

Karpman, S. (1968) Fairy tales and script drama analysis. Transactional Analysis Bulletin, 7: 39-43.

Kessler, R.C., Sonnega, A. Bromet, E., Hughes, M. & Nelson, C.B. (1995) Posttraumatic stress

                                                                                                    31
       disorder in the National Comorbidity Survey. Archives of General Psychiatry, 52: 1048-

       1060.

Kulka, R.A., Schlenger, W.E., Fairbank, J.A., Hough, R.L., Jordan, B.K., Marmar, C.R. & Weiss,

       D.S. (1990) Trauma and the Vietnam war generation: Report of findings from the National

       Vietnam Veterans’ Readjustment Study. New York: Brunner/Mazel.

Lakatos, K., Toth, I., Nemoda, Z., Ney, K., Sasvari, M. & Gervai, J. (2000) Dopamine D4 receptor

       gene polymorphism as associated with attachment disorganization in infants. Molecular

       Psychiatry, 5: 633-637.

Lichtenberg, J.D., Lachmann, F. & Fosshage, D. (1992) Self and motivational systems: Toward a

       theory of technique. Hillsdale, NJ: The Analytic Press.

Linehan, M. M. (1993) Cognitive-behavioral treatment of borderline personality disorder. New

       York: Guilford Press.

Liotti, G. (1991) Patterns of attachment and the assessment of interpersonal schemata:

       Understanding and changing difficult patient-therapist relationships in cognitive

       psychotherapy. Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy, 5: 105-115.

Liotti, G. (1992) Disorganized/ disoriented attachment in the etiology of the dissociative

       disorders. Dissociation, 5: 196-204.

Liotti, G. (1993) Disorganized attachment and dissociative experiences: An illustration of the

       developmental-ethological approach to cognitive therapy. In K.T. Kuehlvein & H. Rosen

       (Eds.) Cognitive therapies in action (pp.213-239). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Liotti, G. (1995) Disorganized/disoriented attachment in the psychotherapy of the dissociative

       disorders. In S. Goldberg, R. Muir & J. Kerr (eds.), Attachment theory: Social,

       developmental and clinical perspectives. Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press (p.343-363).

Liotti, G. (1999) Disorganized attachment as a model for the understanding of dissociative

       psychopathology. In: J. Solomon & C. George (eds.), Attachment Disorganization. New

       York: Guilford Press (pp. 291-317).

                                                                                                 32
Liotti, G. (2000) Disorganized attachment, models of borderline states, and evolutionary

       psychotherapy. In P. Gilbert, K. Bailey (Eds.) Genes on the couch: Essays in evolutionary

       psychotherapy. Hove: Psychology Press (pp.232-256) .

Liotti, G. (2002) The inner schema of borderline states and its correction during psychotherapy: A

       cognitive-evolutionary approach. Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy, 16: 310-325.

Liotti, G. & Intreccialagli, B. (2003) Disorganized attachment, motivational systems and

       metacognitive monitoring in the treatment of a patient with borderline syndrome. In Cortina,

       M. & Marrone, M. (eds.) Attachment theory and the psychoanalytic process. London: Whurr

       (pp.356-381).

Liotti, G., Mollon, P. & Miti, G. (in press) Dissociative disorders. In: Gabbard, G., Beck, J. &

       Holmes, J. (eds.) Oxford textbook of psychotherapy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Liotti, G., Pasquini, P. & The Italian Group for the Study of Dissociation (2000) Predictive factors

       for borderline personality disorder: Patients’ early traumatic experiences and losses suffered

       by the attachment figure. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 102: 282-289.

Lyons-Ruth, K., & Jacobvitz, D. (1999) Attachment disorganization: Unresolved loss, relational

       violence and lapses in behavioral and attentional strategies. In J. Cassidy & P.R. Shaver

       (eds.) Handbook of attachment. New York: Guilford Press (pp. 520-554).

Main, M. (1995) Recent studies in attachment: Overview, with selected implications for clinical

       work. In S. Goldberg, R. Muir & J. Kerr (Eds), Attachment Theory: Social, developmental

       and clinical perspectives. Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press. (pp. 407-474).

Main, M. & Cassidy, J. (1988) Categories of response to reunion with the parent at age six:

       Predicted from infant attachment classification and stable over a one-month period.

       Developmental Psychology, 24: 415-426.

Main, M., Hesse, E. (1990) Parents' unresolved traumatic experiences are related to infant



                                                                                                   33
       disorganized attachment status: Is frightened and/or frightening parental behavior the linking

       mechanism? In M.T. Greenberg, D. Cicchetti & E.M. Cummings (eds.), Attachment in the

       preschool years. Chicago: Chicago University Press (p. 161-182).

Main, M., Kaplan, N. & Cassidy, J. (1985) Security in infancy, childhood and adulthood: A move

       to the level of representation. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child

       Development, 50: 66-104.

Main, M. & Morgan, H. (1996) Disorganization and disorientation in infant Strange Situation

       behavior: Phenotypic resemblance to dissociative states? In L. Michelson & W. Ray (eds.),

       Handbook of dissociation. New York: Plenum Press (p.107-137).

Main, M. & Solomon, J. (1990) Procedures for identifying infants as disorganized/ disoriented

       during the Ainsworth Strange Situation. In M.T. Greenberg, D. Cicchetti & E.M. Cummings

       (Eds.), Attachment in the preschool years. Chicago: Chicago University Press (pp. 121-160).

Marmar, C.R., Weiss, D.S., Schlenger, W.E., Fairbank, J.A., Jordan, B.K., Kulka, R.A. & Hough,

       R.L. (1994) Peritraumatic dissociation and posttraumatic stress in male Vietnam theater

       veterans. American Journal of Psychiatry, 151: 902-907.

Marrone, M. (1998) Attachment and interaction. London: Jessica Kingsley.

McNally, R.J. (2003) Progress and controversy in the study of post-traumatic stress disorder.

       Annual Review of Psychology, 54: 229-252

Mollon, P. (2002). Remembering Trauma. A Psychotherapist’s Guide to Memory and Illusion. 2nd

       Edition. London: Whurr.

Muscetta, S., Dazzi, N., DeCoro, A., Ortu, F., & Speranza, A.M. (1999) States of mind with respect

       to attachment and change in a psychotherapeutic relationship. A study of the coherence of

       transcript in a short-term psychotherapy with an adolescent. Psychoanalytic Inquiry, 19:

       885-921.

North, C.S., Nixon, S.J., Shariat, S., Mallonee, S., & MacMillen, J.C. (1999) Psychiatric disorders



                                                                                                   34
       among survivors of the Oklahoma city bombing. Journal of the American Medical

       Association, 282: 755-762.

Ogawa, J. R., Sroufe, L.A., Weinfield, N.S., Carlson, E.A. & Egeland, B. (1997) Development and

       the fragmented self: Longitudinal study of dissociative symptomatology in a nonclinical

       sample. Development and Psychopathology, 9: 855-879.

Panksepp, J. (1998) Affective neuroscience: The foundations of human and animal emotions.

       Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Paris, J. (1996) Social context and the personality disorders.

Pasquini, P., Liotti, G., Mazzotti, E., Fassone, G., Picardi, A. & The Italian Group for the Study of

       Dissociation (2002) Risk factors in the early family life of patients suffering from

       dissociative disorders. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 105: 110-116.

Polan, H.J. & Hofer, M.A. (1999) Psychobiological origins of infant attachment and separation

       responses. In Cassidy, J. & Shaver, P.R. (eds) Handbook of attachment. New York: Guilford

       Press (pp. 162-180).

Safran, J.D. & Segal, Z.V. (1990) Interpersonal process in cognitive therapy. New York: Basic

       Books.

Sagi, A., van IJzendoorn, M.H., Joels, T. & Scharf, M. (2002) Disorganized reasoning in Holocaust

       survivors. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 72: 194-203

Sagi-Schwartz, A., van IJzendoorn, M.H., Grossmann, K.E., Joels, T., Grossmann, K., Scharf, M.,

       Koren-Karie, N. & Alkalay, S. (2003) Attachment and traumatic stress in female Holocaust

       child survivors and their daughters. American Journal of Psychiatry, 160: 1086-1092.

Schore, A.N. (2001) The effects of early relational trauma on right brain development, affect

       regulation and infant mental health. Infant Mental Health Journal, 22: 201-269.

Schore, A.N. (2002) Dysregulation of the right brain: A fundamental mechanism of traumatic

       attachment and the psychopathogenesis of posttraumatic stress disorder. Australian and

       New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 36: 9-30.

                                                                                                    35
Shalev, A.Y, Peri, T., Canetti, L. & Schreiber, S. (1996) Predictors of PTSD in injured trauma

       survivors: A prospective study. American Journal of Psychiatry, 153: 219-225.

Shane, M., Shane, E. & Gales, M. (1997) Intimate attachments: Toward a new Self-Psychology.

       New York: Guilford Press.

Slade, A. (1999) Attachment theory and research: Implications for the theory and practice of

       individual psychotherapy with adults. In Cassidy, J. & Shaver, P.R. (eds) Handbook of

       attachment. New York: Guilford Press (pp.575-594).

Sloman, L. Atkinson, L., Milligan, K. & Liotti, G. (2002) Attachment, social rank, and affect

       regulation: Speculations on an ethological approach to family interaction. Family Process,

       41: 479-493.

Solomon, J. & George, C. (1999) The place of disorganization in attachment theory. In Solomon, J.

       & George, C. (eds.) Attachment disorganization. New York: Guilford Press (pp. 3-32).

Solomon, Z., Kotler, M. & Mikulincer, M. (1988) Combat-related post-traumatic stress disorder

       among second-generation Holocaust survivors. American Journal of Psychiatry, 145: 865-

       868.

Steele, H. & Steele, M. (2003) Clinical uses of the Adult Attachment Interview. In Cortina, M. &

       Marrone, M. (eds.) Attachment theory and the psychoanalytic process. London: Whurr

       (pp.107-126).

Steele, K., Van der Hart, O. & Nijenhuis, E.R. (2001) Dependency in the treatment of complex

       posttraumatic stress disorder and dissociative disorders. Journal of Trauma &Dissociation,

       2: 79-115.

Ursano, R.J., Fullerton, C.S., Epstein, R.S., Crowley, B., & Vance, K. (1999) Peritraumatic

       dissociation and posttraumatic stress disorder following motor vehicle accidents. American

       Journal of Psychiatry, 156: 1808-1810.

van der Kolk, B. (1994) The body keeps the score: Memory and the evolving psychobiology of

       post traumatic stress. Harvard Review of Psychiatry, 1: 253-265.

                                                                                                    36
Yehuda, R., Halligan, S.L. & Grossman, R. (2001) Childhood trauma and risk for PTSD:

      Relationship to intergenerational effects of trauma, parental PTSD, and cortisol excretion.

      Development and Psychopathology, 13: 733-753.




                                                                                                    37
                               FIGURE 1




                  Attach
                  ment
Trauma            System        A pre-existing IWM of                  Emotional shifts of
                                disorganized attachment is             the drama triangle
                                activated                              (implicit memory)




                PTSD                                                      Dissociative
                Dissociative                                              experiences
                Disorders         Different adjunctive risk facctors      & emotional
                BPD                                                       disregulation




   Figure 1.: A diagram of the sequence leading to trauma-related disorders
   through the mediation of the IWM of disorganized attachment




                                                                                             38
                                                              ABSTRACT


                         During the past decade, research findings, theoretical reflections and clinical experiences

   wove together the themes of attachment disorganization, dissociative processes and vulnerability to

   trauma-related emotional disorders. The resulting unitary perspective is captured in this paper by an

   overview of inquiries on unresolved traumatic memories based on the Adult Attachment Interview

   (AAI) and of studies on the sequelae of early disorganized attachments. To illustrate the intriguing

   clinical implications of this unitary perspective, the paper considers such topics as vulnerability to

   complex trauma-related disorders, delayed dissociative responses to past traumatic memories, and

   the definition of psychological trauma. Some psychotherapeutic implications of the interplay

   between trauma-related disorders and attachment disorganization are briefly addressed in the

   concluding section.




                                                                                                                       39

View publication stats
