5-/12 x 8-1/4
S: 27/32
B: 21/32
Basic - PB
4C
Finish:
Gritty4/17Trauma
and Recovery
The Aftermath of  Violence—
From Domestic Abuse to Political Terror
With a new epilogue by the author
A Member of  the Perseus Books Group
www.basicbooks.com
ISBN 978-0-465-06171-6
978046506171651799$17.99 US / $22.50 CANPsychology
When Trauma and Recovery was first published in 1992, it was hailed as a 
groundbreaking work. In the intervening years, it has become the basic text for 
understanding trauma survivors. By placing individual experience in a broader 
political frame, Judith Herman argues that psychological trauma can be understood only in a 
social context. Drawing on her own research on incest, as well as on a vast literature on combat 
veterans and victims of  political terror, she shows surprising parallels between private horrors 
like child abuse and public horrors like war. A new epilogue reviews what has changed—and 
what has not changed—over two decades. Trauma and Recovery is essential reading for anyone 
who seeks to understand how we heal and are healed.
“A landmark.” —GLORIA STEINEM 
“A book of  luminous intelligence. You must read it as soon as possible.” 
—SOPHIE FREUD
“Astute, accessible, and beautifully documented. Bridging the worlds of  war veterans, 
prisoners of  war, battered women, and incest victims, Herman presents a compelling 
analysis of  trauma and the process of  healing. A triumph.” 
—LAURA DAVIS , coauthor of  The Courage to Heal
“Brilliant.” — BOSTON GLOBE
“This book will surely become a landmark work on the social impact of  psychological 
trauma and on its treatments…. A magniﬁ  cent gift to survivors.” 
—WOMEN’S REVIEW OF BOOKS
“A stunning achievement … a classic for our generation.” 
—BESSEL VAN DER KOLK, M.D ., author of  The Body Keeps the Score
JUDITH HERMAN, M.D.,  is professor of  psychiatry, emerita, at Harvard 
Medical School.
HERMAN Trauma and Recovery
Cover design by Chelsea Hunter
Cover image: Painting by Rosemary Marbach, from the exhibit 
“The Art of  Healing” (Portsmouth, New Hampshire, 1990)
© Rosemary Marbach3/17
3/17“One of  the most important psychiatric works to be published 
since Freud.”—New York /T_i  mes
JUD ITH H ERMAN, M.D.

MORE PRAISE FOR TRAUMA AND RECOVERY
“Herman’s brilliant insights into the nature of trauma and 
the process of healing shine through in every page of this 
rich and compassionate book.” 
—Lenore Walker, ED.D., Director, Domestic Violence  
Institute and author of T errifying Love
“Herman links the public traumas of society to those of  
domestic life in this provocative work of psychiatric theory.”
—Publishers Weekly



TRAUMA  
AND
RECOVERY
The Aftermath of Violence— 
From Domestic Abuse  
to Political Terror
Judith Herman, m.d.
With a New Epilogue by the Author 
A Member of the Perseus Books Group
New York

Copyright © 1992, 1997 by Basic Books
Epilogue © 2015 by Basic Books 
A Member of the Perseus Books Group
All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. No part of this book may be 
reproduced in any manner whatsoever without written permission except in the case of 
brief quotations embodied in critical articles and reviews. For information, address Basic 
Books, 250 West 57th Street, 15th Floor, New York, NY 10107.
Books published by Basic Books are available at special discounts for bulk purchases in the 
United States by corporations, institutions, and other organizations. For more informa-
tion, please contact the Special Markets Department at the Perseus Books Group, 2300 
Chestnut Street, Suite 200, Philadelphia, PA 19103, or call (800) 810-4145, ext. 5000, or 
e-mail special.markets@perseusbooks.com.
The Library of Congress has cataloged the hardcover edition as follows:
Herman, Judith Lewis, 1942–
  T rauma and recovery / Judith Lewis Herman. 
    p .   c m .
  Includes bibliographical references and index. 
1. Post-traumatic stress disorder. 2. Post-traumatic stress disorder—T reatment.  I. Title.
RC552.P67H47  1992
616.85'21—dc29 91–45346
 CIP
ISBN 978-0-465-06171-6 (paperback)
ISBN 978-0-465-09873-6 (e-book)
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

CONTENTS
Acknowledgments vii
Introduction  1
part i
Traumatic Disorders
Chapter 1  A Forgotten History 7
Chapter 2  Terror 33
Chapter 3  Disconnection 51
Chapter 4  Captivity 74
Chapter 5  Child Abuse 96
Chapter 6  A New Diagnosis 115
part ii
Stages of Recovery
Chapter 7  A Healing Relationship 133
Chapter 8  Safety 155
Chapter 9  Remembrance and Mourning 175
Chapter 10  Reconnection 196
Chapter 11  Commonality 214
Afterword  The Dialectic of T rauma Continues 237
Epilogue to the 2015 Edition 248
Notes 277
Index 318

I had thought, before I began, that what I had on my 
hands was an almost excessively masculine tale, a saga 
of sexual rivalry, ambition, power, patronage, betrayal, 
death, revenge. But the women seem to have taken 
over; they marched in from the peripheries of the 
story to demand the inclusion of their own tragedies, 
histories, and comedies, obliging me to couch my 
narrative in all manner of sinuous complexities, to 
see my “male” plot refracted, so to speak, through the 
prisms of its reverse and “female” side. It occurs to me 
that the women who knew precisely what they were 
up to—their stories explain, and even subsume, the 
men’s. Repression is a seamless garment; a society which 
is authoritarian in its social and sexual codes, which 
crushes its women beneath the intolerable burdens of 
honour and propriety, breeds repression of other kinds 
as well. Contrariwise: dictators are always—or at least 
in public, on other people’s behalf—puritanical. So it 
turns out that my “male” and “female” plots are the 
same story after all.
—Salman Rushdie, Shame , 1983



viii

ix

















































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































EPILOGUE TO THE 2015 EDITION
PART I: TRAUMA
Trauma and Recovery  was first published more than twenty years 
ago in an era that seems now like a time of lost innocence in the 
United States. The Cold War was over, and the United States 
had prevailed. Some of the excesses of the clandestine state had 
been curbed. There was even talk of a “peace dividend,” money earmarked 
but no longer needed for a bristling military posture that could instead be 
spent on health and education, roads and bridges—all the projects that 
create prosperity, community, and civil society. At the Fourth Interna-
tional Conference on the Status of Women, in Beijing, First Lady Hillary 
Clinton declared, “Women’s rights are human rights.” And certainly, our 
country stood for human rights. Or so we believed.
But there were ominous signs. Within the United States, prisons were 
becoming the new symbol of racial oppression as millions of people, 
mostly young men of color, were incarcerated. Most had been caught in 
the toils of a seemingly endless “War on Drugs,” in which flagrant dispar-
ities in arrest, prosecution, and sentencing perpetuated the deep divisions 
of race.1 Prisons or the streets had also become the home of last resort for 
many people with severe mental illness, as mental health care and other 
services for our most vulnerable citizens were allowed to deteriorate.2
Then came our national trauma of September 11, 2001, shatter-
ing a collective fantasy of invulnerability. In reaction, our nation em-
barked upon a new and, at this writing, apparently endless series of wars 
abroad. “Terrorism” replaced “Communism” as the malignant enemy to 
be fought anywhere and everywhere. The National Security State grew 
in secret to previously unimagined proportions, and infamous prisons 
named Guantánamo and Abu Ghraib eclipsed the Statue of Liberty as 
symbols of our nation to the world.3
If any further evidence were needed to confirm the psychological 
premise that terror clouds judgment, the invasion of Iraq, a country 

 Epilogue to the 2015 Edition 249
totally unconnected to the terrorist attacks of 9/11, might stand as a 
perfect illustration. Expanding and distracting U.S. military action from 
a relatively limited objective in Afghanistan, President Bush and his ca-
bal instigated a rush to war in Iraq with the collusion of Congress and 
the press, despite ample information available at the time that contra-
dicted the official state narrative and despite worldwide demonstrations 
in protest. Soon our troops found themselves occupying two countries, 
Afghanistan and Iraq, while knowing nothing about their peoples or 
their languages and unable to define a clear mission or to distinguish 
combatants from civilians.
Apparently nothing had been learned from the debacle of the war in 
Vietnam save this one lesson: free citizens will object to fighting brutal 
and apparently futile counterinsurgency wars; if drafted they may join 
anti-war movements and take to the streets. Better, therefore, in the 
minds of our governing class, to abolish the draft and rely on a volunteer 
army.
Fighting in Iraq and Afghanistan, like the operations of CIA “black 
sites” and NSA surveillance, became all but invisible: outsourced, un-
declared, off the books. A docile citizenry could go about its business, 
apparently unaware of or indifferent to the atrocities committed on its 
behalf, in the name of national security, by the U.S. military or by le-
gions of clandestine “contractors” who wore no uniforms. The active 
collusion of members of the legal profession enabled the pretense that 
war crimes were not war crimes. The active participation of members of 
the healing professions, particularly psychologists, in the sadistic rites 
of “enhanced interrogation” enabled the pretense that torture was not 
torture.4 Thus, dissociation came to dominate the affairs of state.
Returning soldiers, who brought with them indelible experiences of 
the battlefield, were left to traverse as best they could the immense di-
vide between knowing and not knowing, military and civilian life. In 
“Redeployment,” a short story by the writer and Marine veteran Phil 
Klay, a Marine sergeant describes in sardonic voice the many disconnec-
tions of his homecoming after seven months in Iraq:
We took my combat pay and did a lot of shopping. Which is how 
America fights back against the terrorists.
Part of what alienates Klay’s fictional sergeant from civilians is his 
moral outrage at the lack of shared sacrifice. But in addition, there is 

250 Epilogue to the 2015 Edition
another cause for his sense of alienation: he suffers from posttraumatic 
stress disorder.
So here’s an experience. Your wife takes you shopping in Wilming-
ton. Last time you walked down a city street, your Marine on point 
went down the side of the road, checking ahead and scanning the 
roofs across from him. The Marine behind him checks the windows 
on the top levels of the buildings . . . and so on down until your guys 
have the street level covered. In a city there’s a million places they can 
kill you from. . . . In Wilmington, you don’t have a squad, you don’t 
have a battle buddy, you don’t even have a weapon. You startle ten 
times checking for it and it’s not there. You’re safe, so your alertness 
should be at white, but it’s not. . . . Outside, there’re people walking 
around by the windows like it’s no big deal. People who have no idea 
where Fallujah is, where three members of your platoon died. People 
who’ve spent their whole lives at white.5
As the conflicts have dragged on, year after year, the sheer numbers 
of returning veterans have ensured that some public attention had to be 
paid to the costs of war. The term posttraumatic stress disorder , or PTSD, 
now well established in the diagnostic canon, has also become part of 
the common idiom. Writing in the New York Times , a U.S. Army major, 
Damon Armeni, describes his experience this way:
Imagine half your mind telling you that you are in a combat zone, 
under attack, that you need to take action to defend yourself, and the 
other half telling you that all you need to do is stop and breathe. You 
don’t know what is real and what isn’t.
Confessing the intense shame that led him to hide his symptoms for 
years, Armeni explains his decision to speak publicly:
I feel an obligation to tell my story, because so many others are suf-
fering through the darkness and pain. Americans must know that the 
scars from PTSD are very real, and in many ways, more painful than 
the ones caused by bullets or shrapnel. I know. I have both.6
Meanwhile, researchers have continued doggedly to document the 
psychiatric casualties of war. Since 2004, the U.S. Army suicide rate has 

 Epilogue to the 2015 Edition 251
increased, with deaths by suicide in some years exceeding the number of 
deaths in combat.7 In a recent survey of veterans returning from combat 
duty in Iraq and Afghanistan, investigators found that close to one in 
four (23 percent) had symptoms of PTSD.8
Sadly, the men who most needed mental health services were the least 
likely to seek help. When asked to name possible concerns that might 
prevent them from seeking counseling, 65 percent of the men in one 
study said they feared they “would be seen as weak.” These soldiers be-
lieved that their leadership or members of their unit might have less 
confidence in them if they were known to have spoken to a counselor. 
The shame of failing to live up to an invulnerable warrior ideal silenced 
these men and condemned them to suffer in isolation.9 In this regard, 
little has changed since the war in Vietnam.
In the meantime, follow-up studies of Vietnam War veterans have 
further deepened our understanding of the terrible long-term effects of 
war. A large scale, in-depth survey called the National Vietnam Veterans 
Readjustment Study (NVVRS) was first conducted in the 1980s (see 
Chapters 2 and 3).10 Reviewing the data from that study, researchers 
confirmed once again that severity of combat exposure was the single 
most important factor in determining whether a soldier would develop 
symptoms of PTSD.
Even among the men who had experienced the most extreme combat, 
however, the majority of those who developed PTSD had been able to 
recover over time. Ten to fifteen years after their combat experience, 
when they were interviewed for the NVVRS study, most of the men 
who had once had PTSD reported that their symptoms had abated, 
with or without treatment. The question then became: What distin-
guished the men who recovered from those who suffered from chronic, 
persistent illness?
Not surprisingly, those who had the greatest advantages in maturity, 
education, and social support proved the most resilient. Conversely, 
the men whose early lives had been scarred by adversity also showed 
the most enduring psychological scars of combat. Histories of abuse in 
childhood rendered men particularly vulnerable to developing chronic 
PTSD. Young age upon entering the military, low educational level, 
having a family member with drug or alcohol problems, and having a 
family member in prison were additional prewar “risk factors” that pre-
dicted long-term difficulties after returning from the war. Among the 
men who had experienced both childhood adversity and heavy combat, 

252 Epilogue to the 2015 Edition
the great majority still met criteria for the PTSD diagnosis some ten to 
fifteen years after their return home from Vietnam.
Along with the severity of combat experience and early life adversity, 
one other factor stood out as a powerful predictor of traumatic stress: 
committing war crimes. The veterans in the study were asked whether 
they had witnessed or participated in harming civilians or prisoners, and 
roughly one in ten acknowledged having done so. It was not clear what 
distinguished the “harmers” from those who never violated the conven-
tions of war. Combat exposure clearly had something to do with it, but 
even among the men with the most severe combat exposure, most did 
not acknowledge harming civilians or prisoners.
The men who did commit war crimes learned that there were con-
sequences. Among the “harmers,” almost two-thirds (63 percent) de-
veloped PTSD, compared with 15 percent of the men who had never 
harmed noncombatants. Moreover, at the time of the study, 40 percent 
of the harmers still had PTSD, compared to 6 percent of those who 
never harmed civilians or prisoners. The authors of this study advocated 
caution regarding the moral and ethical problems confronting soldiers 
in counterinsurgency warfare.11 More than thirty years ago, psychiatrist 
Robert J. Lifton described counterinsurgency wars carried out by armies 
of occupation as “atrocity-producing situations” and warned of the pro-
found moral injury to the soldiers involved.12 Lifton’s predictions have 
been borne out in the life histories of these men.
Recently, the Department of Veterans Affairs sponsored a new  
follow-up study of the same Vietnam veterans who had been inter-
viewed extensively in the 1980s. Among those who had persistent 
PTSD at that time, the majority still had it. Even more striking was the 
fact that the death rate among these men was twice that of those who 
either had never had PTSD or had recovered by the 1980s. Injuries, ac-
cidents, homicide, and suicide were among the common causes of early 
death. “These are the costs of war, over a lifetime,” said Dr. William 
Schlenger, one of the authors of the study.13 These are the costs that 
now will be borne by soldiers returning from Afghanistan and Iraq.
Almost all the veterans in the Vietnam War–era studies were men. In 
the interval between the wars, however, in response to organized move-
ments for women’s equality, the military began to enlist women in sig-
nificant numbers. As of 2011, there were roughly 203,000 women on 
active duty in the U.S. military, representing 14.5 percent of the total.14 
And as women have found in the past, when they attempt to integrate 

 Epilogue to the 2015 Edition 253
previously all-male bastions, they do not always receive a warm welcome. 
Men who resent challenges to their supremacy may express their hostility 
in many different ways, from the most petty to the most extreme. At the 
extreme, sexual violation is the definitive method of putting women in 
their place. Within the military, sexual harassment, sexual assault, and 
rape have become such significant problems that they have given rise to a 
whole new acronym, MST, for military sexual trauma .
Among the complications of this kind of trauma is the fact that the 
perpetrator and victim may be a part of the same small unit who must 
depend upon one another when their lives are in danger. Victims may 
be subject to ostracism and retaliation within their units if they dare to 
accuse a fellow soldier. If they seek redress higher in the chain of com-
mand, they may quickly discover how little they are valued. Here is the 
testimony of Debra Dickerson, a decorated Air Force officer:
I’d been raped and rape was wrong. I never contemplated what lay 
ahead for me. Given that both I and my rapist knew he’d raped me, 
what could I do but press charges? What could he do but go to jail? 
What could our coworkers do but support me?
The unit disowned me.  .  .  . Few in the unit would speak to 
me. Since [the rapist] confessed, there wasn’t much of a trial. He 
was sentenced to six months in military prison.  .  .  . If he’d falsi-
fied an expense voucher and stolen a few hundred bucks from the  
government . . . if he’d smoked a single joint in a stellar fifteen-year 
career, he’d have gotten ten years, not months, and in a real prison. 
But raping a fellow soldier’s not so bad.15
In Dickerson’s testimony, we find the same themes of shame and iso-
lation that are the hallmarks of trauma. But while male veterans are 
made to feel ashamed of their failure to live up to an omnipotent mas-
culine ideal, female veterans with sexual trauma are made to feel shame 
simply for being female. The sexual assault serves as a powerful reminder 
of their inferior status and tells them that they can never be accepted as 
equals in the company of men. When the command structure effectively 
tolerates or condones sexual assault, it reinforces this message with all 
of its institutional weight. Attacks from a perceived enemy, no matter 
how harmful, do not have the same destructive force as attacks from 
within that violate deep bonds of trust and belonging. Psychologist Jen-
nifer Freyd names this kind of situation, when “trusted and powerful 

254 Epilogue to the 2015 Edition
institutions . . . act in ways that visit harm upon those dependent on 
them,” as “institutional betrayal.”16
Thanks to the initiative of women in the U.S. Senate, the Veterans 
Administration is now mandated to screen for sexual trauma and to pro-
vide services to victims. In a recent study, 22 percent of female veterans 
and 1 percent of male veterans who responded to screening questions 
disclosed MST.17 Disturbing as such figures may be, however, it is not 
clear that they differ very greatly from those reported by women in 
the general U.S. population. Though the public still tends to think of 
trauma mainly in connection with the armed services, in fact, most in-
terpersonal violence occurs in civilian life, most victims are women and 
children, and most perpetrators are men well known to their victims.
In the most recent nationwide survey, conducted by the Center for 
Disease Control and Prevention, roughly one in five (19 percent) of 
women reported having been raped, 22 percent reported severe physical 
violence by an intimate partner, and 15 percent reported having been 
stalked. Most of the women were first victimized as adolescents or young 
adults: roughly four out of five rape victims were under twenty-five, and 
two out of five were under eighteen.18 These prevalence figures have 
changed very little over the past fifteen years.19 Rape, it appears, is still 
a common sexual initiation rite for young women in the United States, 
whether in the military or in civilian life.
The rituals of rape on college campuses have received particular atten-
tion in recent years, even gaining notice and concern from the White 
House.20 The freshman year, when young women are away from home 
for the first time and often experimenting with their newfound free-
dom, seems to be a time of particularly high risk for victimization on 
campus. For many years now, college students, both women and men, 
have organized campus demonstrations like “Take Back the Night” to 
raise awareness of violence against women.
As in the case of the military services, the problem is not that college 
campuses are especially dangerous places for young women; in fact, rape 
victimization is even higher among those who do not attend college than 
among their more privileged sisters.21 But as in the case of MST, insti-
tutional betrayal compounds the harm of sexual assault on college cam-
puses, where victims are humiliated, “slut-shamed,” and often driven to 
drop out of school while, with rare exceptions, perpetrators are seen to en-
joy impunity, as their behavior is tacitly accepted. The campus is theirs.22

 Epilogue to the 2015 Edition 255
Institutional betrayal has increasingly become the focus of aware-
ness among survivors of many different forms of trauma. The common 
theme is the profound breach of trust that occurs when those in posi-
tions of authority, by their acts of omission and commission, effectively 
take the side of the perpetrators in their midst. In these instances, the 
more the integrity of the institution is compromised, the more it ap-
pears that officials will seek to cover up the problem in order to protect 
the institution’s reputation rather than aiding the victims of abuse.
The most notorious instance of institutional betrayal to be uncovered 
in the past two decades involved the widespread sexual abuse of chil-
dren by members of the Catholic priesthood. Reporters at the Boston 
Phoenix  and the Boston Globe  first broke the story in 2002, and the 
Globe  Spotlight Team won a Pulitzer Prize that year for their in-depth 
coverage of the story.23 As the scandal widened, first to other cities in 
the United States and then to Europe and South America, it became 
apparent that the Catholic Church had been harboring and enabling 
pedophiles within the clergy for decades.
Numerous survivors came forward to break their bonds of shame and 
secrecy, organize for change, and seek accountability from the Cath-
olic authorities, supported by members of the faithful who dared to 
challenge this most authoritarian hierarchy. In Boston, activists demon-
strated every Sunday in front of the Holy Cross Cathedral, demanding 
the resignation of Cardinal Bernard Law, who had overseen the policy 
of protecting predators for so many years. It caused the cardinal some 
serious embarrassment, as he was forced to sneak out of his own cathe-
dral each week to avoid the demonstrators. Within a year, he tendered 
his resignation and was quietly transferred to Rome, where he lives out 
his days at ease as archpriest of the Basilica of Santa Maria Maggiore, 
attended by nuns.
Several factors added to the credibility of the survivors of abuse by 
the Catholic clergy. Most significantly, the Church’s own documents, 
which the Boston Globe  forced it to release under court order, clearly 
showed how the Church had knowingly protected predators on numer-
ous occasions. Then there were the sheer numbers of survivors—many 
of whom had been abused by the same perpetrators, as bishops, in 
managing their dioceses, transferred pedophile priests from one parish 
to the next. In addition, many if not most of those who came forward 
were middle-aged white men who reported being abused by priests 

256 Epilogue to the 2015 Edition
when they were young boys. There were also plenty of women survi-
vors of abuse as young girls, although the media did not consider them 
as “newsworthy.”
The survivors’ stories had a terrible similarity: many came from de-
vout families who held priests in the highest esteem, as representatives of 
God. Their anguish at their betrayed trust was evident. Many had vainly 
sought redress from within the Church and had turned to the media or 
the law only after being met repeatedly with cold indifference.
Individual survivors who had recourse to the law of course had to 
endure aggressive challenges to their credibility. This was particularly 
true for those—and there were many—who reported a period of am-
nesia followed by delayed recall. Many of the same old expert witnesses 
from twenty years ago were still out there, claiming that “psycholog-
ical science” (no less) proved that “repressed memories” could not be 
credible (see Afterword, 1997). However, these “false memory” experts 
have had increasing difficulty persuading judges and juries, for the sci-
entific consensus has moved toward a better understanding of the mem-
ory disturbances of trauma survivors.24 Advances in neurobiology have 
documented the effects of trauma on the brain that cause “repressed 
memories” (the condition more properly called dissociative amnesia). 
Additional studies have also shown that recovered and continuous 
memories are equally likely to be accurate.25
My colleague Dan Brown, a psychologist who has testified as an ex-
pert witness in many such cases, reports that functional brain-imaging 
studies have been particularly useful in court because they offer con-
crete, easy-to-understand illustrations of the brain changes related to 
traumatic memory disturbances. In a recent summary of a now-robust 
scientific literature, he writes, “Neuroimaging studies consistently show 
deactivation of a [right brain] circuit in dissociative amnesia—exactly 
the circuit normally operative in the retrieval of emotional autobi-
ographical memories.”26 Apparently a picture of the brain is worth any 
number of words when it comes to persuading judges and juries.
Beyond the specifics of the “memory wars,” a large body of research 
in the past two decades has documented with terrible precision the vast 
and profound long-term effects of child abuse in every domain of life. In 
this area, advances in neuroscience, medical epidemiology, and attach-
ment research have led the way.
My old friend and collaborator Bessel van der Kolk has recently accom-
plished the immense task of synthesizing the literature on neurobiology 

 Epilogue to the 2015 Edition 257
of trauma in clear language that ordinary people can understand. I will 
not attempt to summarize badly a body of knowledge that he has sum-
marized so well in his landmark book, The Body Keeps the Score: Brain, 
Mind, and Body in the Healing of Trauma .27 Suffice it to say that techni-
cal advances in neuroimaging make it possible to map very specifically 
the brain areas and functions damaged by childhood adversity. It is even 
possible to demonstrate the differential effects of abuse and neglect at 
different stages of development.28
Disturbances in brain systems that organize the flight, fight, or freeze 
responses to danger were the first to be documented in trauma survivors, 
and many current treatment approaches still conceptualize PTSD sim-
ply as a disorder of fear. But it has now become clear that the effects of 
trauma on the brain extend far beyond this one system, especially when 
trauma occurs in childhood. Early life trauma affects the “emotional 
brain,” the right brain, which develops rapidly in the first years of life 
and whose functions form the basis of human sociability.29 In recogni-
tion of this expanded concept of trauma, PTSD is no longer classified as 
an anxiety disorder in the most recent diagnostic manual of the Amer-
ican Psychiatric Association (DSM-5) and in the forthcoming Interna-
tional Classification of Diseases (ICD-11). Rather, both classification 
systems recognize the traumatic disorders as a category unto themselves. 
The DSM-5 includes aspects of what I have called Complex PTSD (see 
Chapter 6) in its broadened definition of the basic disorder and also 
recognizes a dissociative subtype. The current draft for ICD-11, by con-
trast, narrows the basic definition of PTSD but also explicitly recognizes 
the category of Complex PTSD resulting from prolonged and repeated 
traumas, especially those originating in childhood.30
The long-term health consequences of child abuse were brought to 
light by a landmark epidemiological study called the Adverse Childhood 
Experiences (ACE) study. Carried out jointly by Kaiser Permanente and 
the Center for Disease Control and Prevention, the study involved over 
17,000 patients who filled out questionnaires on childhood experiences 
as part of their routine medical histories. They responded to questions 
regarding physical and sexual abuse, neglect, and witnessing domestic 
violence. In addition, they were asked whether a parent had been drug 
addicted, alcoholic, mentally ill, or in prison or whether a parent had 
died during their childhood. One point was scored for each category 
of adverse experience, and the patients’ scores were correlated with the 
extensive information available in their medical records.

258 Epilogue to the 2015 Edition
The results were stunning: higher ACE scores were strongly correlated 
with greater incidence of the ten leading causes of death in the United 
States, including heart disease, lung disease, and liver disease. The inter-
mediary factors were not hard to recognize: ACE scores were powerfully 
related to smoking, obesity, alcoholism, risky sexual behavior, and injec-
tion drug use.31
ACE scores were also by far the most powerful predictors of clinical 
depression and suicidal behavior. To cite just one example, patients with 
any one adverse childhood experience (an ACE score of 1) were twice 
as likely to have made a suicide attempt as those who reported no child-
hood adversities, and patients with ACE scores of 5 were 10 times  as 
likely to have attempted suicide.32
Reflecting on the importance of the ACE study, Vincent Felitti, one 
of the principal investigators, writes, “Why are only some of us suicides, 
or addicts, or obese, or criminals? Why do some of us die early while 
others live long? What is the nature of the scream on the other side of 
silence? What does it mean that some memories are unspeakable, for-
gotten, or lost in amnesia—and does it matter? Is there a hidden price 
for this comfort of remaining unaware?”33 Astute readers will have noted 
the similarities in this heartfelt cry to the questions raised by returning 
veterans.
The ACE study relied on retrospective accounts of childhood expe-
riences by adult patients. Though the study could demonstrate pow-
erful correlations between childhood histories and adult pathology, it 
could not make definitive conclusions about how childhood adversities 
had led to such terrible outcomes. That task was undertaken by a num-
ber of prospective studies that followed children over the years as they 
grew to adulthood and gave birth to the next generation. A prospective 
longitudinal study is an immense undertaking, requiring extraordinary 
resourcefulness, ingenuity, and devotion. The wealth of scientific data 
produced by such studies is beyond compare.
In 1987, psychiatrist Frank Putnam and psychologist Penelope T rick-
ett, who were then based at the National Institute of Mental Health 
(NIMH), began a prospective study of sexually abused girls in Washing-
ton, D.C. Girls with confirmed reports of sexual abuse by family mem-
bers were referred to the study by Child Protective Service agencies. A 
control group of girls, matched for age, race, family constellation, and 
socioeconomic status, was recruited by local advertising.

 Epilogue to the 2015 Edition 259
The girls were studied extensively at the time of referral, when their 
median age was eleven, and at five follow-up intervals. At the most 
recent follow-up, when their median age was twenty-five, many had 
children of their own, whom they brought into the study. The overall re-
tention rate for the study was an amazing 96 percent, a testament to the 
caring relationships that the investigators had built with their subjects.
The investigators also managed to keep the study going despite the fact 
that in the late 1990s, NIMH, under new leadership, became hostile to 
studying child abuse. The concept of dissociation was particularly anath-
ema to the scientists who had assumed power in the organization; they 
didn’t “believe in” dissociation, and they certainly did not think that re-
spectable researchers should study it. Finding himself suddenly shunned 
by the old boys’ network of researchers among whom he had built a 
stellar career, Putnam left NIMH. “I was liberated by that experience,” he 
says, “and ultimately went somewhere where I could do much more.” At 
the Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Putnam found sup-
port not only to continue the study but also to develop a treatment pro-
gram for maternal depression that is now being replicated in six states.34
At each follow-up, Putnam and his collaborators could see the average 
life course of the abused girls diverging in ominous ways from that of 
the girls who had not been abused (though there was considerable varia-
tion within each group). Biologically, the abused girls developed abnor-
malities in stress hormones and autonomic nervous system arousal, high 
rates of obesity, and early onset of puberty. Educationally, they had more 
learning difficulties. Psychologically, they were more depressed, and 
many were highly dissociative. In their teens, or even earlier, they devel-
oped high rates of substance abuse and self-harming behavior. Their so-
cial development tended to be maladaptive, with early and risky sexual 
behavior and high rates of revictimization by both casual and intimate 
partners. They were more likely to drop out of school, become pregnant 
in their teens, and have premature deliveries when they gave birth.
Finally, though those who became mothers did not abuse their chil-
dren, the survivors of abuse were much more likely than their peers to 
neglect their children and, as a result, to find themselves involved once 
more with Child Protective Services. This “intergenerational transmis-
sion” of trauma, long observed by clinicians, was shown to be one of 
the most serious long-term consequences of abuse, affecting about one 
in five (18 percent) of the abused mothers. In the comparison group of 

260 Epilogue to the 2015 Edition
girls who had not been abused, fewer than 2 percent of those who be-
came mothers were reported to Child Protective Services for neglecting 
their children.
Summing up their findings after twenty-three years, the researchers 
commented, “Collectively, these sexually abused females are by and large 
tracking life trajectories associated with chronic illness and the leading 
causes of death and in many ways resemble the high Adverse Childhood 
Experiences group in the well-known Adverse Childhood Experiences 
study. Moreover, the complex, multi-symptomatic clinical profiles . . . 
are similar to those included under the constructs of ‘Developmental 
T rauma Disorder’ in children and ‘Complex PTSD’ in adults.”35
The sexually abused girls in this study received very little treatment 
of any kind; those who managed to avoid a pathological life course did 
so with their own inner resources and whatever social supports they 
could muster. Meanwhile, however, a number of remarkable prospective 
studies have demonstrated independently that early intervention with 
mothers and children at high risk can successfully avert this malignant 
developmental pathway.36
One such study, directed by psychologist Karlen Lyons-Ruth, my col-
league at Cambridge Hospital, is now approaching its thirtieth year. The 
Family Pathways Project, as the study is called, followed infants and their 
mothers who were referred by community agencies because of concerns 
about the quality of maternal care. Most of the mothers were poor, many 
were single, many were adolescents, and many were depressed. The ba-
bies ranged from newborns to nine months old at the time they entered 
the study. The mothers were offered weekly home visiting services, while 
a comparison group of high-risk mothers and babies received only the 
customary medical and pediatric care.
The home visitors were either licensed social workers or mature 
women who came from the same community as their clients and who 
had reputations as good mothers. All home visitors received weekly 
group supervision. The tasks of the home visitors were varied and flexi-
ble. They helped the young mothers with immediate needs, like seeking 
food stamps or trying to find suitable housing. They also spent time 
with the mothers and babies together, educating the mothers about nor-
mal child development and modeling attuned and attentive care. The 
weekly visits went on just until the babies were eighteen months old. 
Thereafter, the families were followed up at regular intervals.

 Epilogue to the 2015 Edition 261
In contrast with previous researchers who focused on clear-cut child-
hood adversities such as physical or sexual abuse, Lyons-Ruth and her 
colleagues focused primarily on relational variables. In particular, they 
paid close attention to charting the security of infant attachment. At-
tachment theory, as developed by the British psychoanalyst John Bowlby 
and his followers, conceptualizes the foundations of human sociability 
in complex neurobiological systems that cause infants to seek closeness 
with their caretakers when frightened or under stress.37 Reciprocal sys-
tems in adults form the basis of caretaking behavior and emotional at-
tunement to infants.38
The attachment system, which humans share with many other spe-
cies, serves a primary function of protecting the young from danger. But 
in humans, attachment serves also as the basis for the developing child’s 
ability to regulate emotions. Children who are reliably soothed and 
comforted when they are in distress gradually learn to comfort them-
selves by evoking mental images of their caretakers. They develop what 
Bowlby called “internal working models” of a caring relationship.39 Safe 
attachment also functions as a secure base from which the developing 
child can confidently explore the environment. Ultimately, secure at-
tachment permits the development of a self-identity as a person worthy 
of love and care and a capacity to love and care for others.40
When the children in the Family Pathways study were about eigh-
teen months old, videotape recordings were made of mother-child 
interactions in the home and also in the laboratory, where a standard-
ized brief interaction called the Strange Situation was used to assess 
the quality of the infant’s attachment to the mother.41 In the Strange 
Situation, mother and child enter a room where they find lots of toys 
and meet a stranger (a lab assistant). After a bit of playtime, the mother 
leaves the room. Most children are distressed when this happens but 
will eventually stop crying and may even hesitantly accept an invitation 
from the lab assistant to play with a toy. When the mother returns, 
however, a securely attached child will stop whatever she is doing and 
rush eagerly toward her mother, calling out to her. A joyful reunion 
ensues; most often the mother will greet the child, pick her up, hold 
her, and talk to her in a soothing, musical voice. After this, the child 
will readily settle down and soon start exploring and playing again. In 
normal population studies, about 65–70 percent of U.S. children are 
rated as securely attached.

262 Epilogue to the 2015 Edition
There are various pathologies of insecure attachment behavior. The 
most ominous type is called disorganized attachment. The reunions 
of disorganized infants with their mothers in the Strange Situation are 
painful to watch. The infants seem to be in conflict about whether to 
approach or avoid their mothers, as though they need and fear them at 
the same time. Instead of moving toward their mothers, they may freeze 
or start to approach and then move off at an angle, or they may seem to 
move in slow motion, as though they were swimming underwater. No 
greeting reunion takes place. The mothers may not pick up the infants 
or may hold them at a distance from their bodies and put them down 
quickly. When my students observe these videos, they call out to the 
mothers, imploring them to hold their infants; our own attachment sys-
tems are powerfully evoked by these disturbed interactions.
The effectiveness of the home visiting interventions in the Family 
Pathways Project was already apparent when the children reached eigh-
teen months. Among the high-risk families who had received a year or 
more of the services, about one in three children (32 percent) showed 
signs of insecure attachment, a percentage not far from the general 
norm. Among those who had not received any home visiting services, 
however, almost twice as many (60 percent) were insecurely attached.
By age five, the children who had not received any home visiting ser-
vices already seemed set upon a malignant path. Most (71 percent) were 
showing hostile behavior in kindergarten, according to their teachers. At 
age seven, all these children showed maladaptive behavior in the class-
room. By contrast, in the group who had received at least a year of ser-
vices before eighteen months, the positive effect of the intervention was 
still apparent years later; only about one in three showed disturbed be-
havior in kindergarten (29 percent) and in second grade (33 percent).42
Of note, the social workers and the community women did equally 
well as home visitors. The mothers described their social work visitors 
as helpful and caring. “She’s very kind” was a typical comment. By con-
trast, the mothers often described the community women in terms like 
“the sister I never had.”43
By the time the children in the Family Pathways Project reached late 
adolescence, researchers could track the unfolding of borderline per-
sonality and dissociative disorders in those who had not benefited from 
early intervention. When interviewed at age nineteen or twenty, about 
half of all the subjects in the study reported that they had been physi-
cally or sexually abused at some point in childhood. But abuse alone did 

 Epilogue to the 2015 Edition 263
not account for the manifestations of what I have been calling Complex 
PTSD. What had not happened very early in the lives of these children 
was as important as the abuse that had happened later on. Disorganized 
attachment, observed at eighteen months, was a powerful predictor of 
dissociation in late adolescence.44 Maternal withdrawal from the child, 
observed in the videotapes at eighteen months, was a powerful predic-
tor of suicide attempts and self-injury.45 Early maternal withdrawal and 
abuse later in childhood both contributed independently to the devel-
opment of borderline symptoms. 
These discoveries, which have been confirmed by other studies,46  
require a reformulation of the concept of complex trauma in childhood. 
It has now become clear that the impact of early relational disconnec-
tions is as profound as the impact of trauma with a capital T. Studies 
of early attachment and its vicissitudes have led to a deeper and more 
nuanced understanding of the disturbances in identity, self-regulation, 
and self-compassion that afflict adult survivors of childhood abuse and 
neglect.
A relational theory also offers a basis for understanding the remarkable 
effectiveness of the early intervention in the Family Pathways Project. 
The home visitors, regardless of their professional credentials, provided 
a relational holding environment, a secure base for the young, inexperi-
enced mothers, enabling them in turn to become more attuned to their 
infants and to allow secure attachment processes to unfold. Once more 
benign early mother-child relational patterns were established, the se-
curely attached children and their mothers embarked on a more normal 
developmental pathway that created its own virtuous cycle, and further 
intervention was not necessary. By contrast, the mothers and children 
who did not receive the home visiting service were unable to correct 
their early relational disconnection, which then formed the basis for a 
worsening cascade of developmental pathology.
Given the enormous medical, psychiatric, and social costs of child-
hood trauma and the availability of prevention programs that have 
proven their effectiveness, common sense would dictate that such pro-
grams ought to be made available immediately to all young mothers and 
their babies or, at the very least, to those at high risk. But as the history 
of the trauma field has shown repeatedly, increasing scientific knowledge 
and raising public awareness are only the first steps in efforts to end 
violence. Moving from awareness into social action requires a politi-
cal movement strong enough to overcome pervasive denial, the passive 

264 Epilogue to the 2015 Edition
resistance of institutional inertia, and the active resistance of those who 
benefit from the established order. In the past two decades, unfortu-
nately, no popular movement has shown this kind of power, whether in 
the public domain of war and war crimes or in the private domain of 
crimes against women and children.
In the domain of war, the voices of veterans have increased public 
awareness regarding the suffering of wounded warriors, but despite oc-
casional scandals and promises of reform in the Veterans Administra-
tion, the organized power of veterans has not been sufficient to achieve 
dependably accessible health and mental health care for our own war 
casualties, let alone to change the conduct of war itself. And though 
public war weariness led to the election of a president who promised 
to put an end to purposeless wars, without a strong antiwar movement, 
the war machine grinds on. The courage of investigative journalists and 
whistle-blowers has revealed some of the outrages of the National Secu-
rity State, but without a popular movement demanding accountability, 
massive secret government spying on its citizens continues, in violation 
of the Constitution. The high-government officials who brought dis-
grace to our country with their embrace of torture still boast that they 
would do it again, and Guantánamo Prison still holds its captives in 
indefinite confinement.
In the domain of private life, women have continued to raise con-
sciousness in the United States and throughout the world regarding 
sexual and domestic violence. In the United States, government agen-
cies now conduct well-designed studies to determine the prevalence 
of violence against women. Internationally, the United Nations now 
recognizes violence against women as the most common human rights 
violation in the world, and a special rapporteur is appointed to gather 
information on violence against women in each member country. In 
2009, Yakin Erturk, then the special rapporteur, summed up the prog-
ress she had seen: “T raditional patriarchy has slowly but systematically 
been ruptured at different paces in various parts of the world. Applying 
a human rights perspective to violence has created a momentum for 
breaking the silence around violence, and for connecting the diverse 
struggles across the globe.”47
Despite increased awareness of sexual violence, however, women have 
not as yet been able to hold offenders and their enablers accountable 
in ways that might actually begin to reduce the incidence of sexual as-
sault. Most crimes of sexual assault still go unreported, as victims recoil 

 Epilogue to the 2015 Edition 265
from the public shaming they will almost certainly encounter if they 
come forward. Those who do muster the courage to report must then 
withstand the adversarial procedures of civil and criminal law, often de-
scribed as a “second rape” (see Chapter 3). Small wonder, then, that 
sexual assault still remains effectively a crime of impunity.48
Even those survivors brave enough to face the ordeals of legal proceed-
ings may be dissuaded because our court system does not really provide 
the kinds of accountability that they seek. The financial remedies and 
criminal punishments that courts impose often fit poorly with survivors’ 
visions of justice. What seems of paramount importance to most survi-
vors is social validation—that is, public acknowledgement of both the 
facts and the harms of the crime. Beyond this, what survivors desire most 
is vindication; they want their communities to take a clear stand in de-
nouncing the crime so that the burdens of shame are lifted from their 
shoulders and placed on the offenders, where they rightfully belong.49
Recently, a new path for seeking justice has opened up for instances of 
rape on college campuses in the United States as students, parents, and 
activist faculty have challenged the “institutional betrayals” that foster 
a climate of impunity for sexual assaults. Citing numerous examples of 
bureaucratic inaction, cover-up, and victim blaming, the complainants 
argue that tolerance of a “rape culture” on college campuses violates 
women’s right to equal educational opportunity.50 They have filed civil 
rights complaints with the U.S. Department of Education, under Title 
IX, the 1972 federal statute prohibiting sex discrimination at educa-
tional institutions that receive federal funding.
These legal actions have definitely made an impression. At my uni-
versity, as of this writing, Harvard Law School has just been found in 
violation of Title IX and has entered into a resolution agreement with 
the U.S. Department of Education’s Office of Civil Rights, promising 
immediately to “take specific steps to ensure that it responds to student 
complaints of sexual harassment and sexual violence promptly and eq-
uitably.” This agreement does not resolve a Title IX investigation of 
Harvard College, which is still ongoing.51 Wendy Murphy, an attorney 
who filed the complaint against Harvard Law School, expressed the 
hope that this agreement would be a model for change at the numer-
ous other educational institutions currently under investigation for vi-
olation of Title IX.52 If so, these remedies might offer survivors some 
measure of the social validation and vindication that is most important 
to them.53

266 Epilogue to the 2015 Edition
For adult survivors of childhood abuse, legal remedies are usually even 
further out of reach than they are for survivors of recent sexual assaults. 
All the more remarkable, therefore, has been the success of an organized, 
impassioned movement of adult survivors demanding accountability 
from the Catholic Church for its long history of harboring pedophiles. 
As of March 2014, the U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops reports 
receiving credible allegations of abuse by 6,427 priests and other clerics 
from 17,259 survivors. The Church has paid over $3 billion to settle 
damage claims from thousands of survivors.
In most cases, however, it was too late for criminal justice because the 
statute of limitations had expired long before survivors dared to come 
forward. Thus, of the over 6,000 priests and other clerics credibly ac-
cused, fewer than 600 ever faced any criminal charge, and only about 
300 have been convicted and sentenced to a prison term.54 Moreover, 
although some of the most egregious perpetrators may have been ex-
posed and disciplined, no bishop has been held publicly accountable 
by the Church for a policy of protecting what amounted to a criminal 
network. And of course, holding one institution, even one as powerful 
as the Catholic Church, accountable for abuses perpetrated by its clergy 
does not begin to address the much wider social problem of child abuse 
and neglect.
Children have no voice in the public arena, no voting bloc in elec-
toral politics, and no powerful moneyed interest group to advocate on 
their behalf. Young mothers are almost as voiceless. Though preventive 
interventions serving high-risk mothers and children would be relatively 
inexpensive to implement and would pay for themselves many times 
over in the long term, most politicians’ budgetary vision does not extend 
past the next election cycle. We are left, therefore, to pick up the pieces 
later on, when survivors turn to mental health professionals for help.
PART II: RECOVERY
Recovery still begins, always, with safety. The model of recovery stages 
proposed in this book has held up remarkably well over two decades and 
is now widely recognized as the foundation of trauma treatment. The 
three-stage model forms the backbone of the Expert Consensus Guide-
lines for Treatment of Complex PTSD , published by the International 
Society for T raumatic Stress Studies, and the Guidelines for the Treatment 

 Epilogue to the 2015 Edition 267
of Dissociative Disorders , published by the International Society for the 
Study of T rauma and Dissociation.55 Basic textbooks on treatment of 
complex post-traumatic and dissociative disorders published in the last 
decade also use the three-stage model.56
In the light of new discoveries about the importance of early attach-
ment, one can conceptualize the task of the first stage of recovery as 
rebuilding a secure base. Once this relational foundation is established, 
the numerous psychological scars that afflict survivors of childhood 
trauma can then be addressed.
As psychiatrist Erik Erikson outlined many years ago, the capacities 
for autonomy, initiative, industry, identity, and intimacy unfold sequen-
tially, beginning with basic trust, established in the first years of life.57 If 
basic trust is damaged, all subsequent developmental stages are affected. 
Therefore, it seems intuitive that the earlier the corrective intervention 
takes place, the more effective it will be. By the time survivors of child-
hood trauma reach adulthood, recovery is a complicated and demand-
ing project. The good news is that recovery is possible. The bad news is 
that the path is long and sometimes arduous.
The paradox and challenge of psychotherapy with trauma survivors is 
that it requires a trusting relationship as its foundation, yet with people 
whose trust has been profoundly violated, building trust must be a goal 
rather than a precondition of treatment. This goal is achieved gradually, 
through a painstaking process of trial and error, breach and repair. Obvi-
ously, everyone would like to have a brief, simple, inexpensive treatment 
that is also effective, but wishing, alas, does not make it so.
In the past two decades, however, as we have entered the era of  
“evidence-based” medicine, numerous methods or “brands” of therapy 
have been developed, and numerous studies have been conducted in 
the search for that brief, simple trauma treatment. The scientific “gold 
standard” of clinical research is the randomized controlled trial (RCT) 
in which an identical dose of a particular treatment is compared with 
a placebo or with another treatment for the same condition. The RCT 
design works quite well for drug studies, but it is a poor fit for psycho-
therapy research, because psychotherapy is not a pill.
Psychotherapy is difficult to standardize; indeed, many would ar-
gue that psychotherapy, as the imaginative product of a relationship 
between two individuals, cannot and should not be standardized. The 
RCT design, however, dictates that the therapy being studied should 
follow a detailed manual and seeks to eliminate, as far as possible, the 

268 Epilogue to the 2015 Edition
variations due to the personalities of therapist and patient in order to 
ensure that each patient receives an identical treatment. The RCT de-
sign also requires highly standardized outcome measures. This leads to 
a narrow focus on symptom reduction. In trauma treatment studies, 
success is usually measured by reductions in PTSD symptoms. Though 
most would agree that this criterion is a necessary measure of success, it 
is hardly sufficient. The goals of psychotherapy are far more ambitious 
than this; we aim more broadly for the restoration of a life worth living.
Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT), which lends itself most readily 
to standardization, has been by far the most widely studied treatment 
method. In particular, one type of PTSD treatment, called Prolonged 
Exposure, has been recognized by the Institute of Medicine as suffi-
ciently “evidence-based.”58 T wo types of CBT treatment, Prolonged 
Exposure and Cognitive Processing Therapy, have been endorsed by 
the Veterans Administration, which has invested considerable effort in 
trying to “roll out” these forms of treatment, especially Prolonged Expo-
sure, in their mental health services.
The conceptual basis for exposure therapy is the Pavlovian concept 
of conditioning. It is thought that the fear circuitry of the brain has 
become conditioned to react to a stimulus associated with past trauma 
as though the danger is still present. When the patient is exposed repeat-
edly to the fear stimulus in an environment of safety, according to this 
theory, the inappropriate fear response is deconditioned.
By now it has become clear, however, that the impact of trauma is far 
more profound and pervasive than a simple fear-conditioning model 
can explain. Not surprisingly, therefore, results of exposure treatments 
have been decidedly mixed. Though they appear to be effective in reduc-
ing PTSD symptoms in some patients, many patients do not respond, 
and dropout rates are high.59 In a recent study of patients diagnosed 
with PTSD in the Veterans Administration, the majority did not com-
plete the recommended treatment.60
Here is the testimony of one such dropout, David J. Morris, a former 
Marine infantry officer. In his first meeting with his assigned therapist at 
the VA, he was told that Prolonged Exposure was the best treatment for 
him and then instructed to start talking in great detail about his most 
horrific memories. After a month of this treatment, Morris reported that 
his symptoms had gotten much worse. When the therapist continued to 
defend the treatment, Morris quit.

 Epilogue to the 2015 Edition 269
After my experience with prolonged exposure, I did some research 
and found that some red flags had been raised about it. . . . After 
waiting three months, after completing endless forms, I was offered 
an overhyped therapy built on the premise that the best way to escape 
the aftereffects of hell was to go through hell again.61
Readers of this book will recognize that moving directly into the work 
of Stage T wo (exploring trauma memories) without any previous atten-
tion to the work of Stage One (building the therapeutic alliance and 
attending to safety in the present) can be downright harmful. It makes 
sense, therefore, that as a first approach, therapies addressing Stage One 
issues might be more acceptable to patients and therapists alike. In fact, 
a number of such treatment methods have shown promising results, 
though they lack any official imprimatur at this time. These treatments 
focus on problems related to the trauma in the present rather than on 
trauma memories.
Safety always begins with the body. If a person does not feel safe in her 
body, she does not feel safe anywhere. Body-oriented therapies, there-
fore, can be useful in early recovery. For instance, two studies published 
in 2014 report that yoga has been helpful for patients with PTSD, partic-
ularly for reducing startle reactions and hyperarousal symptoms as well 
as reducing psychological numbing.62 Bessel van der Kolk, the principal 
investigator in one of the studies, explains that yoga has been shown 
to restore a balance between two branches of the autonomic nervous  
system: the sympathetic branch, which organizes the body for action, 
including fight or flight, and the parasympathetic branch, which orga-
nizes the body for digestion, rest, and repair. When these two systems 
are in balance, people feel well. He writes, “In yoga you focus your atten-
tion on your breathing and on your sensations moment to moment. . . . 
As I often tell my students, the two most important phrases in yoga are  
‘Notice that’ and ‘What happens next?’ Once you start approaching 
your body with curiosity rather than fear, everything shifts.”63
Several randomized controlled trials have also compared a model 
called Present-Centered Therapy (PCT) with Prolonged Exposure and 
other established CBT treatments, and found that PCT was equally ef-
fective as a treatment for PTSD and had fewer dropouts.64 These results 
certainly call into question the theory that exposure is necessary for ef-
fective treatment for PTSD.

270 Epilogue to the 2015 Edition
Recognizing that a staged approach to treatment might be the most 
desirable, psychologist Marylene Cloitre and her colleagues developed 
a two-part cognitive-behavioral treatment for complex trauma called 
STAIR/NST. The acronyms stand for Skills T raining in Affective  
and Interpersonal Relations and Narrative Story Telling. Prior to em-
barking on the work of recalling the trauma, this model addresses 
problems in self-care, emotion regulation, and relationships in the 
present. Initial outcome data showed that each component of the 
treatment was somewhat effective in reducing PTSD symptoms but 
that the best results were obtained when the two were combined in 
sequence.65 These promising findings led the National Institute of 
Mental Health to approve funding for a five-year dissemination study, 
which is in progress as of this writing, in early 2015.
The current study is based at six different sites around the country, in 
public hospitals and clinics that serve poor people. Adult women with 
histories of interpersonal trauma and PTSD are eligible for the study. 
Patients are randomly assigned either to STAIR/NST or to the usual 
treatment that each site provides (treatment as usual, or TAU). The ra-
tionale for this comparison is to determine whether the experimental 
treatment is an improvement over the kinds of treatment currently of-
fered in the real world.
The patients are seen weekly, for sixteen to twenty-four weeks. The 
STAIR/NST manual is actually written for sixteen sessions; the range 
is introduced to allow patients and therapists a little bit of “real world” 
flexibility, with an option for up to eight unscripted sessions. When 
I asked Dr. Cloitre what the rationale was for the time limit, she ex-
plained frankly that there was no clinical rationale but that this was the 
longest treatment she thought would be approved by an NIMH review 
committee. (I have no doubt that, as an experienced researcher with a 
long track record of successful grant writing, she knew what she was 
talking about.) Patients who were actively suicidal, self-harming, sub-
stance abusing, or in unsafe relationships were screened out of the study 
in tacit recognition of the fact that these patients would need a good 
deal more than four to six months of weekly psychotherapy.
The Victims of Violence (VoV) Program in the Department of Psy-
chiatry at Cambridge Health Alliance was included in the grant as one 
of the treatment sites. CHA is a teaching hospital, where my colleagues 
and I have built the VoV Program to be a model for trauma treatment 
and training. I was excited about participating in this study because 

 Epilogue to the 2015 Edition 271
the treatment we offer had never before been studied in a randomized 
controlled trial. We have gathered enough outcome data over the years 
to expect that our treatment would hold up well, but certainly, if the 
STAIR/NST model turned out to be superior, that would be an import-
ant finding.
The treatment at our clinic is a staged model based in psychody-
namic, relational concepts, with an eclectic mix of other techniques 
added in. Our usual treatment is not time-limited, but in order to have 
a TAU that was comparable to the experimental treatment, our staff  
developed a brief schematic outline of the kinds of issues that would 
be the focus of treatment at each stage of recovery. This served as our 
practice guide.
The study is now entering its fifth year, and we will not know the 
results until sometime in 2016. Until then, we can share only some 
tentative impressions from our site. It appears to us that each type of 
treatment is helpful for some people; the challenge will be to predict 
which treatment is the best fit for any particular patient.
The highly structured STAIR/NST treatment seems to appeal to peo-
ple who approach it almost like a class and are motivated to do the 
weekly “homework” that is required. Other patients, however, rebel 
against the constraints of the model. Their lives are far too chaotic for 
a “class,” and many drop out. In contrast, more patients seem to stick 
with our TAU, where they have the freedom to begin by talking about 
whatever is on their minds on any particular day. Regardless of which 
treatment they receive, however, it is clear that most patients are not 
“cured” at the end of four to six months. We have usually referred them 
for further treatment when they say farewell to the study. For complex 
trauma, we know of no quick fix.
Though psychodynamic treatments are much more lengthy, complex, 
and resistant to standardization than CBT, outcome research in the last 
decade has begun to catch up, thanks in particular to a number of Euro-
pean investigators.66 Most remarkably, psychologists Anthony Bateman 
and Peter Fonagy, in London, have developed a highly effective treat-
ment program for patients diagnosed with borderline personality dis-
order, using a psychodynamic treatment focused on a process they call 
mentalization. As they define it, “Mentalization is the capacity to make 
sense of each other and ourselves, implicitly and explicitly, in terms of 
subjective states and mental processes. Understanding other people’s be-
havior in terms of their likely thoughts, feelings, wishes and desires is 

272 Epilogue to the 2015 Edition
a major developmental achievement that, we believe, biologically origi-
nates in the context of the attachment relationship.”67
In a randomized controlled trial, patients diagnosed with borderline 
personality disorder were assigned either to usual and customary treat-
ment or to a mentalization program that lasted three years, with eigh-
teen months of day treatment, followed by eighteen months of weekly 
individual and group psychotherapy. All the patients were followed reg-
ularly for eight years from the start of the study. In the mentalization 
treatment group, patients essentially stopped making suicide attempts, 
cutting themselves, and being hospitalized, while the comparison group 
showed little change.68 As the effectiveness of this treatment approach 
became apparent, it was also adapted as a purely outpatient treatment, 
with excellent results.69
The concept of mentalization, or “holding mind in mind,” offers a 
way of explaining complex relational ideas both to patients and to ther-
apists. In a worksheet for patients at the Menninger Clinic, psychologist 
Jon Allen demystifies the concept, explaining that mentalizing means 
“being aware of your own thoughts and feelings as well as the thoughts 
and feelings of others. . . . [This] includes not only empathy for others, 
but also empathy for yourself.”70 He describes the “mentalizing style 
of psychotherapy” as “conversational, informal, commonsensical, and 
engaged.”71 He also suggests that another name for mentalization-based 
treatment could be “plain old therapy.”
Imagine my delight in discovering such an articulate and scientifically 
grounded defense of “plain old therapy.” It certainly sounds like what 
we have been practicing at the Victims of Violence Program all these 
years. What I have been calling establishing safety or Stage One seems 
quite similar to what Allen calls “restoring mentalizing in attachment 
relationships.” Once sufficient safety has been established, then the 
trauma- focused work of Stage T wo, remembering and mourning, can 
be done. As Allen cautions, however, it is important not to lose sight of 
the ultimate goal, which is “living better in the present and future,”72 
what I have called Stage Three, or reconnection.
This commonsense, “plain old therapy” approach is in fact a highly so-
phisticated form of treatment, built on a vast evidence base that demon-
strates that the single most powerful predictor of therapeutic success 
is the quality of the relationship between patient and therapist. Many 
years ago, psychologist Carl Rogers and his followers showed that rela-
tional qualities of the therapist like accurate empathy, nonjudgmental 

 Epilogue to the 2015 Edition 273
warmth, and genuineness are among the strongest predictors of good 
treatment outcome.73 By contrast, the particular method or technique 
of therapy counts for relatively little. When competing treatments are 
compared with one another in well-designed studies, no one method 
shows clear-cut superiority.74 Psychologist Bruce Wampold, comparing 
psychotherapy methods, invokes the “Dodo Bird Principle” from Alice 
in Wonderland : “All have won, and all shall have prizes.”75
As I and many others have argued, psychotherapy is more craft than 
science, but it can certainly be studied scientifically.76 New and different 
scientific approaches are needed, however. By now it is well established 
that one of the most important “active ingredients” in psychotherapy is 
the therapeutic alliance.77 Therefore, rather than seeking to eliminate 
the individuality of therapist and patient, as is done in a randomized 
controlled trial, a good starting point might be to study the common 
attributes of gifted therapists of different technical schools, the master 
craftsmen and women of our profession.78 To do this, of course, would 
be to leave the conventional scientific “gold standard” behind. But then 
again, as an economist friend pointed out to me recently, “didn’t we 
leave the gold standard ages ago?”
One example of a new, more naturalistic approach to psychother-
apy outcomes in the real world is a prospective study of treatment of 
patients with dissociative disorders. These are generally considered to 
be the most extreme of the post-traumatic disorders, requiring long-
term psychotherapy over a period of years. The study enlisted over 200  
patient-therapist pairs who agreed to periodic evaluations. The therapy 
did not follow a manual but rather a set of expert consensus guidelines.
After thirty months of treatment focused on stabilization (Stage 
One), the patients in this study showed improvements on average in 
dissociation, PTSD, depression, and self-harm. These findings are a wel-
come antidote to therapeutic nihilism that regards patients with disso-
ciative disorders as untreatable (or, worse, suggests that their condition 
is caused by credulous therapists).79 The study is still in progress as of 
this writing.
T reatment outcome research until now has mainly focused on indi-
vidual psychotherapy. Yet group therapy has shown great promise for 
trauma recovery because groups can offer such a powerful antidote to 
the shame and social isolation that afflict trauma survivors. By offering 
a safe and relatively structured context for peer relationships, groups 
provide survivors with an experience of acceptance and belonging. 

274 Epilogue to the 2015 Edition
Groups also provide the occasions for healthy feelings of pride, as mem-
bers discover that they have much to offer one another. And as group 
members take in the compassion of others, they gradually develop self- 
compassion. At the Victims of Violence Program, we conceptualize 
groups as a “bridge to new community,” helping survivors reconnect 
with the society from which they have felt so alienated.80
It is not surprising to me that groups have been relatively neglected 
in clinical research. Groups are not easy to run well, and they are not 
easy to study. Think of all the complications in standardizing individual 
therapy, and multiply by the number of group members. Nevertheless, 
enough studies have been done to show that many different kinds of 
groups seem to be effective treatments for PTSD.81
One of the largest studies to date compared trauma-focused and  
present-centered group treatment for veterans with PTSD at ten differ-
ent sites within the VA system. The results sustained the “Dodo-Bird” 
hypo thesis; both treatments were equally effective.82 However, in my view, 
these researchers missed a great opportunity when they randomly assigned 
subjects to one type of group or the other without considering the possi-
bility that each treatment would be best if matched with the subject’s stage 
of recovery. I would have predicted that people in early recovery would 
do well in present-centered groups but not in trauma-focused groups. 
Conversely, people who were ready for the second stage of recovery work 
would be far more likely to do better in a trauma-focused group.
Having a better sense of which groups would be best for which patients 
would be particularly useful, as group therapy is the main form of treat-
ment offered in many mental health systems. There is a simple-minded 
reason for promoting group therapy that has nothing to do with its effec-
tiveness: it is thought to be cost-effective because one therapist can treat 
many patients at once. In reality, a well-run therapy group is not cheap; 
it requires careful preparation and screening, and ideally it should have 
two coleaders and regular supervision. It should also be small enough so 
that all the group members get plenty of opportunity to participate. A 
better reason to promote group therapy is that a well-run group offers a 
powerfully liberating experience for trauma survivors.
At the Victims of Violence Program, we have developed a number of 
models for groups we offer regularly. All the groups are time-limited, 
ranging from ten weeks to several months, and most groups are offered 
in addition to individual psychotherapy rather than as a sole mode of 
treatment. The groups are time-limited for both clinical and practical 

 Epilogue to the 2015 Edition 275
reasons. Practically speaking, it is much easier for both the therapists 
and the patients to commit to regular attendance for a set period of 
time. Clinically, the emotional intensity of the groups is much more 
sustainable within a limited time period. And although in Stage One 
and Stage T wo groups patients bond with one another around their 
shared identity as trauma survivors, in the long term, we do not want to 
encourage the idea that only another survivor can understand a trauma 
survivor. Suffering in the world takes many forms, and trauma survivors 
have both much to give and much to learn from others who have not 
had the same life experiences.
Stage One groups at the Victims of Violence Program have self- 
explanatory titles like the T rauma Information Group, T rauma and the 
Body, Meditation and Stress Management, Healthy Relationships, and 
Yoga for T rauma Survivors. The focus of these groups is on establishing 
safety and self-care. Group members do not share details of their trauma 
histories; rather, they bond around the ways they continue to suffer in 
the present from the trauma. They find commonality in understanding 
their symptoms, even as they learn new and more adaptive ways to man-
age their symptoms in the course of the group.
A number of early-recovery group models have been developed at 
other clinical centers. Perhaps the best known is “Seeking Safety,” a set 
of twenty-five educational exercises for patients who suffer from trauma 
and substance abuse, a model that can be flexibly adapted either for 
individual or group therapy.83 Several controlled studies have demon-
strated effectiveness of Seeking Safety treatment in reducing symptoms 
of PTSD and substance abuse.84
At the Victims of Violence Program, we also have a time-tested model 
for a Stage T wo group. This is a descendant of the incest survivors’ group 
that I developed with my old friend and colleague Emily Schatzow in 
the 1980s, described in some detail in this book (see Chapter 11). 
Adapted to a wider range of patients at Cambridge Hospital, over the 
years the group has become one of our “hardy perennials.” We now call 
it the T rauma Recovery Group, or TRG. Patients who have participated 
in this group, mostly survivors of multiple forms of interpersonal vi-
olence beginning in childhood, have shown significant reductions in 
depression, PTSD, dissociation, and interpersonal problems as well as 
improvements in emotion regulation and self-esteem.
One of the great pleasures of my teaching career has been to see a new 
generation of clinicians adopt and develop this model. Recently, a grant 

276  Epilogue to the 2015 Edition
from a private foundation enabled us to develop and publish a practice 
guide for this group. The psychologist Michaela Mendelsohn, who had 
been a postdoctoral fellow at VoV and who then became the director of 
our research team, designed and led the careful process that translated a 
wealth of clinical craft from an oral culture to a written one.85
As one of the grandmothers of the project, I got to  kvell when the 
book was published. Kvell is a Yiddish word that means, literally, to 
overflow, like a fountain or a spring, and, figuratively, to feel joy at the 
accomplishments of the next generation. To my knowledge, the TRG is 
one of the only published Stage T wo group models.
The liberation of recovery feels both ordinary and miraculous. We 
who engage with survivors in the process of recovery gain inspiration 
and courage to persevere despite hearing stories of cruelty that repeat-
edly stagger our imagination. Patients who engage in therapy groups 
gain inspiration and courage from one another. So I will close by quot-
ing from the testimony of “Lenore,” a patient in one of our T rauma 
Recovery Groups:
The biggest things for me are the benefits of not keeping a secret and 
being able to talk about things that—I thought that if I ever talked 
about them I would melt and disappear into the ground, or people 
would go scurrying from the room like rats. And I found out that 
didn’t happen, both for me and for other people. I can almost step 
outside myself now and look at the circumstances, because I know 
how I would respond if someone told me my story. I would feel really 
sad for that person. So I hope I can keep that perspective.86
In this brief statement, “Lenore” touches on many of the themes of 
this book: overcoming the barriers of shame and secrecy, making intol-
erable feelings bearable through connection with others, grieving the 
past, and coming to a new perspective with a more compassionate view 
of oneself in the present. Witnessing the lives transformed in this pro-
cess of recovery is what enables us old-timers, the practitioners of “plain 
old therapy,” to keep on keeping on.



278 Notes


 Notes 279


280 Notes


 Notes 281


282 Notes


 Notes 283


284 Notes


 Notes 285


286 Notes


 Notes 287


288 Notes


 Notes 289


290 Notes


 Notes 291


292 Notes


 Notes 293


294 Notes


 Notes 295


296 Notes


 Notes 297


298 Notes


 Notes 299


300 Notes


 Notes 301


302 Notes


 Notes 303


304 Notes


 Notes 305


306 Notes


 Notes 307


308 Notes


 Notes 309


310  Notes


 Notes 311
Epilogue to the 2015 Edition
1. The United States imprisons a higher percentage of its people than author-
itarian regimes in Iran, China, and Russia. See M. Alexander, The New Jim 
Crow: Mass Incarceration in the Age of Colorblindness (New York: New Press, 
2011).
2. D. R. Rubinow, “Out of Sight, Out of Mind: Mental Illness Behind Bars,” 
American Journal of Psychiatry  171 (2014): 1041–44.
3. J. Risen, Pay Any Price: Greed, Power, and Endless War  (New York: Hough-
ton Mifflin, 2014).
4. Risen (ibid.) describes in detail how the American Psychological Associ-
ation modified its ethics code to provide cover for psychologists partici-
pating in the interrogation of detainees and to allow the “just following 
orders” defense made infamous at Nuremberg. By contrast, the American 
Psychiatric Association and the American Medical Association ethics codes 
bar members absolutely from taking part in interrogations. See K. G. Pope 
and T. G. Gutheil, “Contrasting Ethical Policies of Physicians and Psychol-
ogists Concerning Detainee Interrogations,” British Medical Journal 338 
(2009): 1653.
My colleague Ken Pope, coauthor of a basic textbook on ethics in psy-
chology, a former fellow of the American Psychological Association and 
former chairperson of their Ethics Committee, resigned from the organiza-
tion in protest of its altered ethics policy. In his resignation letter, he wrote, 
“These changes take APA so far away from its ethical foundation, historic 
traditions, and basic values, and from my own personal and professional 
view of our responsibilities, that I cannot support them with my member-
ship.” Letter to APA president, February 6, 2008.
5. P . Klay, “Redeployment,” in Redeployment  (New York: Penguin, 2014).
6. D. T. Armeni, “A Soldier Fights Off the Cold,” New York Times , May 11, 
2014, SR11.
7. M. K. Nock, C. A. Deming, C. S. Fullerton et al., “Suicide Among  
Soldiers: A Review of Psychosocial Risk and Protective Factors,” Psychiatry  
76 (2013): 97–125.
8. J. J. Fultona, P . S. Calhouna, H. R. Wagnera, A. R. Schrya, L. P . Hai-
ra et al., “The Prevalence of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder in Operation 
Enduring Freedom/Operation Iraqi Freedom (OEF/OIF) Veterans: A  
Meta-Analysis,” Journal of Anxiety Disorders (forthcoming 2015).
9. C. W. Hoge, C. A. Castro, S. C. Messer, D. McGurk, D. I. Cotting, and 
R. L. Koffman, “Combat Duty in Iraq and Afghanistan, Mental Health 
Problems, and Barriers to Care,” New England Journal of Medicine 351 
(2004): 13–22.
10. R. A. Kulka et al., National Vietnam Veterans Readjustment Study (NVVRS): 
Description, Current Status, and Initial PTSD Prevalence Estimates  (Wash-
ington, DC: Veterans Administration, 1988).

312 Notes
11. B. P . Dohrenwend, T. J. Yager, M. M. Wall, and B. G. Adams, “The Roles 
of Combat Exposure, Personal Vulnerability and Involvement in Harm to 
Civilians or Prisoners in Vietnam War-related Posttraumatic Stress Disor-
der,” Clinical Psychological Science  1, no. 3 (December 2013): 223–238.
12. R. J. Lifton, Home from the War: Vietnam Veterans—Neither Victims Nor 
Executioners  (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1973).
13. B. Carey, “Combat Stress Among Veterans Is Found to Persist Since Viet-
nam,” New York Times , August 8, 2014, A14.
14. Figures from Department of Defense website, www.defense.gov.
15. D. Dickerson, An American Story  (New York: Pantheon, 2000), 120–22.
16. C. P . Smith and J. J. Freyd, “Institutional Betrayal,” American Psychologist  
69 (2014): 575–87.
17. R. Kimerling, K. Gima, M. W. Smith, A. Street, and S. Frayne, “The Veter-
ans Health Administration and Military Sexual T rauma,” American Journal 
of Public Health  97 (2007): 2160–66.
18. The comparable figures for men were 2 percent, 14 percent, and 6 per-
cent. M. J. Breiding, S. G. Smith, K. C. Basile et al., “Prevalence and 
Characteristics of Sexual Violence, Stalking, and Intimate Partner Vio-
lence Victimization—National Intimate Partner and Sexual Violence 
Survey, United States, 2011,” Center for Disease Control and Prevention: 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR ), September 5, 2014.
19. P . Tjaden and N. Thoennes, Prevalence, Incidence, and Consequences of Vi-
olence Against Women: Findings From the  National Violence Against Women 
Survey  (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice, 1998).
20. Presidential Memorandum, “It’s On Us” Initiative: September 19, 2014. 
White House Council on Women and Girls, www.whitehouse.gov/blog.
21. S. Sinozich and L. Langton, Special Report: Rape and Sexual Assault Victim-
ization Among College-Age Females, 1995–2013  (Washington, DC: U.S. 
Department of Justice, 2014), Bureau of Justice Statistics, NCJ248471.
22.  In one of the rare instances in which college officials did notify police, 
leading to eventual trial and conviction of members of the football team 
for the gang rape of an unconscious woman, the perpetrators were so 
confident of their entitlement that three participants recorded the rapes 
on their phones, and the ringleader could be seen laughing, handing out 
condoms, and encouraging his teammates to join in. See A. Blinder and  
R. Perez-Pena, “Vanderbilt Rape Convictions Stir Dismay and Denial,” 
New York Times , January 28, 2015.
23. Investigative Staff of the Boston Globe , Betrayal: The Crisis in the Catholic 
Church  (New York: Little, Brown, 2002).
24. My colleague Frank Putnam, a professor of both psychiatry and pediat-
rics, notes that a similar group of “usual suspects” can be counted upon 
to dispute instances of physical child abuse. To account for evidence such 
as multiple fractures of different ages seen on X-ray, these “experts” cite 

 Notes 313
a fictitious syndrome called “Temporary Brittle Bone Disease.” When it 
comes to issues of child abuse, the level of persistent social denial often 
staggers the imagination. F . W. Putnam, personal communication with au-
thor, November 4, 2014.
25. C. Dalenberg, “Recovered Memory and the Daubert Criteria: Recovered 
Memory as Professionally Tested, Peer Reviewed and Accepted in the 
Relevant Scientific Community,” Trauma, Violence and Abuse  7 (2006): 
274–301. See also B. A. van der Kolk, “The Unbearable Heaviness of Re-
membering,” chapter 12 in The Body Keeps the Score: Brain, Mind and Body 
in the Healing of Trauma  (New York: Viking, 2014), 184–99.
26. D. Brown, Neuroimaging of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder and Dissociative 
Disorders  (unpublished manuscript, Boston, MA, 2014).
27. B. van der Kolk, The Body Keeps the Score: Brain, Mind, and Body in the 
Healing of Trauma  (New York: Viking, 2014).
28. M. Teicher, K. Rabi, Y. S. Sheu, S. B. Seraphin et al., “Neurobiology of 
Childhood T rauma and Adversity,” in The Impact of Early Life Trauma on 
Health and Disease: The Hidden Epidemic , ed. R. A. Lanius, E. Vermetten, 
and C. Pain (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2010), 112–22.
29. A. N. Schore, “Biological Approaches to Early Life T rauma,” in The Im-
pact of Early Life Trauma on Health and Disease: The Hidden Epidemic , ed.  
R. A. Lanius, E. Vermetten, and C. Pain (New York: Cambridge University 
Press, 2010), 142–47. Dr. Schore is the author of a major, three-volume 
work integrating psychoanalytic theory, developmental psychology, and 
neuroscience: Affect Regulation and the Origin of the Self ; Affect Dysregula-
tion and Disorders of the Self ; and Affect Regulation and the Repair of the Self  
(New York: W. W. Norton, 1994, 2003, 2003).
30. M. W. Miller, E. J. Wolf, and T. M. Keane, “Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 
in DSM-5: New Criteria and Controversies,” Clinical Psychology: Science 
and Practice  21 (2014): 208–20.
31. V. J. Felitti, R. F . Anda, D. Nordenberg et al., “The Relationship of Adult 
Health Status to Childhood Abuse and Household Dysfunction,” Ameri-
can Journal of Preventive Medicine  14 (1998): 245–58.
32. S. R. Dube, R. F . Anda, V. J. Felitti et al., “Childhood Abuse, Household 
Dysfunction, and the Risk of Attempted Suicide Throughout the Lifespan: 
Findings from the Adverse Childhood Experience Study,” Journal of the 
American Medical Association  286 (2001): 3089–96.
33. V. J. Felitti, “Foreword,” in The Impact of Early Life Trauma on Health and 
Disease: The Hidden Epidemic , ed. R. A. Lanius, E. Vermetten, and C. Pain 
(New York: Cambridge University Press, 2010), xiii.
34. F . W. Putnam, personal communication with author, November 4, 2014. 
The treatment model, called Moving Beyond Depression, indirectly serves 
a preventive function as well, as maternal depression is a major risk factor 
for child abuse and neglect.

314 Notes
35. P . K. T rickett, J. G. Noll, and F . W. Putnam, “The Impact of Sexual Abuse 
on Female Development: Lessons from a Multigenerational, Longitudi-
nal Research Study,” Development and Psychopathology  23 (2011): 453–76, 
quote on page 468.
36. See, for example, D. L. Olds, “The Nurse-Family Partnership: An Evi-
dence-Based Preventive Intervention,” Infant Mental Health Journal  27 
(2006): 5–25.
37. J. Bowlby, Attachment and Loss , vol. 1:  Attachment  (New York: Basic Books, 
1969).
38. C. George and J. Solomon, “Attachment and Caregiving: The Caregiv-
ing Behavioral System,” in Handbook of Attachment: Theory, Research, and 
Clinical Applications , ed. J. Cassidy and P . R. Shaver (New York: Guilford, 
1999), 649–70.
39. I. Bretherton and K. A. Mulholland, “Internal Working Models in At-
tachment Relationships: Elaborating a Central Construct in Attachment 
Theory,” in Handbook of Attachment: Theory, Research, and Clinical Applica-
tions, 2nd ed., ed. J. Cassidy and P . R. Shaver (New York: Guilford, 2008). 
102–28.
40. J. Bowlby, A Secure Base: Parent-Child Attachment and Healthy Human  
Development  (New York: Basic Books, 1988).
41. M. D. S. Ainsworth, M. C. Blehar, E. Waters, and S. Wall, Patterns of 
Attachment: A Psychological Study of the Strange Situation  (Hillsdale, NJ: 
Erlbaum, 1978).
42. K. Lyons-Ruth and M. A. Easterbrooks, “Assessing Mediated Models of 
Family Change in Response to Infant Home Visiting: A T wo-Phase Longi-
tudinal Analysis,” Infant Mental Health Journal  27 (2006): 55–69.
43. K. Lyons-Ruth, personal communication with author.
44. L. Dutra, J.-F . Bureau, B. Holmes, A. Lyubchik, and K. Lyons-Ruth, 
“Quality of Early Care and Childhood T rauma: A Prospective Study of 
Developmental Pathways to Dissociation,” Journal of Nervous and Mental 
Disease  197 (2009): 383.
45. K. Lyons-Ruth, J.-F . Bureau, B. Holmes, A. Easterbrooks, and N. H. Brooks, 
“Borderline Symptoms and Suicidality/Self-Injury in Late Adolescence:  
Prospectively Observed Relationship Correlates in Infancy and Childhood,” 
Psychiatry Research  206 (2013): 273–81.
46. E. A. Carlson, B. Egeland, and L. A. Sroufe, “A Prospective Investigation of 
the Development of Borderline Personality Symptoms,” Development and 
Psychopathology  21 (2009): 1311–34.
47. Y. Erturk, 15 Years of the United Nations Special Rapporteur on Violence 
Against Women (1994–2009)—A Critical Review , UN Office of the High 
Commissioner for Human Rights, 2009, Document #A/HRC/11/6/
Add5.

 Notes 315
48. A recent study estimated that 13 percent of reported rapes in the United 
States resulted in conviction of the offender. See K. Daly and B. Bonhours, 
“Rape and Attrition in the Legal Process: A Comparative Analysis of Five 
Countries,” Crime and Justice  39 (2010): 485–565.
49. J. L. Herman, “Justice from the Victim’s Perspective,” Violence Against 
Women  11 (2005): 571–602.
50. “U.S. Department of Education Releases List of Higher Education Insti-
tutions with Open Title IX Sexual Violence Investigations,” News Release, 
U.S. Department of Education, May 1, 2014, www.ed.gov.
51. News Release, U.S. Department of Education, January 5, 2015.
52. Quoted in The Harvard Crimson , January 4, 2015.
53. Psychologist Mary Koss, a national expert on campus rape, has been at 
the forefront of developing victim-centered restorative justice models to 
offer as options for responding to complaints of rape. See M. P . Koss,  
J. K. Wilgus, and K. M. Williamsen, “Campus Sexual Misconduct: Restor-
ative Justice Approaches to Enhance Compliance with Title IX Guidance,” 
Trauma, Violence, and Abuse  15 (2014): 242–57. 
54. A comprehensive archive of data regarding sexual abuse of children within 
the Catholic Church is maintained by the nonprofit organization Bishop 
Accountability, (www.BishopAccountability.org). 
55. M. Cloitre, C. A. Courtois, A. Charuvastra, R. Carpezza, B. C. Stolbach, 
and B. L. Green, “T reatment of Complex PTSD: Results of the ISTSS 
Clinician Survey on Best Practices,”  Journal of Traumatic Stress  24 (2011): 
615–27; International Society for the Study of T rauma and Dissociation, 
“Special Issue: Guidelines for T reating Dissociative Identity Disorder in 
Adults,” Journal of Trauma and Dissociation  12 (2011): 113–212.
56. J. M. Chu, Rebuilding Shattered Lives: Treating Complex PTSD and Dis-
sociative Disorders , 2nd ed. (New York: J. Wiley & Sons, 2011); C. A. 
Courtois and J. D. Ford, Treatment of Complex Trauma: A Sequenced, Rela-
tionship-Based Approach  (New York: Guilford, 2013).
57. E. H. Erikson, Childhood and Society  (New York: Norton, 1950).
58. Institute of Medicine, Treatment of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: An Assess-
ment of the Evidence  (Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2008).
59. A. McDonagh, M. Friedman, G. McHugo et al., “Randomized T rial of 
Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy for Chronic Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 
in Adult Female Survivors of Childhood Sexual Abuse,” Journal of Clini-
cal and Consulting Psychology  73 (2005): 515–24; J. D. Ford and P . Kidd, 
“Early Childhood T rauma and Disorders of Extreme Stress as Predictors of 
T reatment Outcome with Chronic Posttraumatic Stress Disorder,” Jour-
nal of Traumatic Stress  11 (1998): 743–61; P . P . Schnurr, M. J. Friedman,  
C. Engel et al., “Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for Posttraumatic Stress Dis-
order in Women: A Randomized Controlled T rial,” Journal of the American 

316 Notes
Medical Association  297 (2007): 820–30; R. Bradley, J. Greene, E. Russ,  
L. Dutra, and D. Westen, “A Multidimensional Meta-Analysis of Psycho-
therapy for PTSD,” American Journal of Psychiatry  162 (2005): 214–27.
60. K. H. Seal, S. Maguen, B. Cohen et al., “VA Mental Health Services Utili-
zation in Iraq and Afghanistan Veterans in the First Year of Receiving New 
Mental Health Diagnoses,” Journal of Traumatic Stress  23 (2010): 5–16.
61. D. J. Morris, “After PTSD, More T rauma,” New York Times , January 18, 
2015, SR1.
62. E. M. Seppala, J. B. Nitschke, D.L. T udorascu et al., “Breathing-Based 
Meditation Decreases Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Symptoms in US 
Military Veterans: A Randomized Controlled Study,” Journal of Traumat-
ic Stress  27 (2014): 397–405; B. van der Kolk, L. Stone, J. West et al., 
“Yoga as an Adjunctive Therapy for PTSD,” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry  
75 (2014): 559–65.
63. van der Kolk, Body Keeps the Score , 273.
64. D. Frost, K. M. Laska, and B. E. Wampold, “The Evidence for Pres-
ent-Centered Therapy as a T reatment for Posttraumatic Stress Disorder,” 
Journal of Traumatic Stress  27 (2014): 1–8.
65. M. Cloitre, K. Chase Stovall-McClough, K. Nooner et al., “T reatment 
for PTSD Related to Childhood Abuse: A Randomized Controlled T rial,” 
American Journal of Psychiatry  167 (2010): 915–24.
66. See F . Leischenring and S. Rabung, “Effectiveness of Long-Term Psycho-
dynamic Psychotherapy: A Meta-Analysis,” JAMA: Journal of the American 
Medical Association  300, no. 13 (2008): 1551–65.
67. P . Fonagy and A. Bateman, “The Development of Borderline Personali-
ty Disorder—A Mentalizing Model,” Journal of Personality Disorders  22 
(2008): 4–21, 5.
68. A. Bateman and P . Fonagy, “Eight-Year Follow-Up of Patients T reated for 
Borderline Personality Disorder: Mentalization-Based T reatment Versus 
T reatment as Usual,” American Journal of Psychiatry  165 (2008): 631–38.
69. A. Bateman and P . Fonagy, “Randomized-Controlled T rial of Outpatient 
Mentalization-Based T reatment Versus Structured Clinical Management 
for Borderline Personality Disorder,” American Journal of Psychiatry  166 
(2009): 1355–64.
70. J. Allen, Restoring Mentalizing in Attachment Relationships: Treating Trauma 
with Plain Old Therapy  (Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Publish-
ing, 2013), 197.
71. Ibid., 193.
72. Ibid., 202.
73. C. B. T ruax and R. R. Carkhuff, Toward Effective Counseling and Psycho-
therapy  (Chicago: Aldine, 1967).
74. B. E. Wampold, Z. E. Imel, K. M. Laska et al., “Determining What Works 
in the T reatment of PTSD,” Clinical Psychology Review  30 (2010): 923–33.

 Notes 317
75. B. E. Wampold, The Great Psychotherapy Debate: Models, Methods, and 
Findings. (Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum, 2001).
76. J. L. Herman, “Craft and Science in the T reatment of T raumatized People,” 
Journal of Trauma and Dissociation  9 (2008): 293–300.
77. For a review of this point, see A. O. Horvath, A. C. D. Re, C. Fluckiger, 
and D. Symonds, “Alliance in Individual Psychotherapy,” in Psychotherapy 
Relationships That Work: Evidence-Based Responsiveness , 2nd ed., ed. J. C. 
Norcross and M. J. Lambert (New York: Oxford University Press, 2011), 
25–69.
78. K. M. Laska, A. S. Gurman, and B. E. Wampold, “Expanding the Lens of 
Evidence-Based Practice in Psychotherapy: A Common Factors Perspec-
tive,” Psychotherapy 51, no. 4 (2014): 467–81.
79. B. Brand and R. Loewenstein, “Does Phasic T rauma T reatment Make  
Patients with Dissociative Identity Disorder More Dissociative?” Journal of 
Trauma and Dissociation  15 (2014): 52–65.
80. M. Mendelsohn, R. Zachary, and P . Harney, “Group Therapy as an Ecolog-
ical Bridge to New Community,” Journal of Aggression, Maltreatment and 
Trauma  14 (2007): 227–43.
81. M. T. Shea, M. McDevitt-Murphy, D. J. Ready, and P . P . Schnurr, “Group 
Therapy,” in Effective Treatments for PTSD: Practice Guidelines from the 
International Society for Traumatic Stress Studies , 2nd ed., ed. E. B. Foa,  
T. M. Keane, M. J. Friedman, and J. A. Cohen (New York: Guilford, 
2009), 306–26.
82. P . P . Schnurr, M. J. Friedman, D. W. Foy et al., “Randomized T rial of T rau-
ma-Focused Group Therapy for Posttraumatic Stress Disorder,” Archives of 
General Psychiatry  60 (2003): 481–88.
83. L. M. Najavits, Seeking Safety: A Treatment Manual for PTSD and Substance 
Abuse  (New York: Guilford, 2002).
84. R. A. Desai, I. Harpaz-Rotem, L. M. Najavits, and R. A. Rosenheck, 
“Impact of Seeking Safety Program on Clinical Outcomes Among Home-
less Female Veterans with Psychiatric Disorders,” Psychiatric Services  59 
(2008): 996–1003; D. A. Hien, L. R. Cohen, G. M. Miele, L. C. Litt, and  
C. Capstick, “Promising T reatments for Women with Comorbid PTSD 
and Substance Abuse Disorders,” American Journal of Psychiatry  161 
(2004): 1426–32; L. M. Najavits, R. D. Weiss, S. R. Shaw, and L. R. 
Muenz, “‘Seeking Safety’: Outcome of a New Cognitive-Behavioral Psy-
chotherapy for Women with Posttraumatic Stress Disorder and Substance 
Dependence,” Journal of Traumatic Stress  11 (1998): 437–56.
85. M. Mendelsohn, J. L Herman, E. Schatzow, M. Coco, D. Kallivayalil, 
and J. Levitan, The Trauma Recovery Group: A Guide for Practitioners  (New 
York: Guilford, 2011).
86. Ibid., 103.



 Index 319


320 Index


 Index 321


322 Index


 Index 323


324 Index


 Index 325


326 Index
